Jeziorski hits career mark, leads Perham to victory over Hawley
By Jason Groth on Feb 14, 2019  at 11:00 p.m.
Perham's Josh Jeziorski drives to the hoop, gets the layup to drop and draws the foul. Jeziorski went over the 1,000 point mark with this basket and became the second boys basketball player in school history to accomplish the feat. Carter Jones/FOCUS1 / 2
Perham's Charlie Rasmussen drives into the lane and draws the contact against Hawley. Rasmussen finished with 14 points for Perham in the Yellowjackets' 79-55 victory over the Nuggets. Carter Jones/FOCUS2 / 2
Once Perham senior Josh Jeziorski got the points he needed to join the 1,000 point club, the senior took control and helped Perham to a 79-55 victory over Hawley in a Heart O’Lakes Conference clash at the Hive.
Jeziorski finished with a game high of 32 points, blasting his way past the 1,000 point plateau and becoming the second Perham boys basketball player to accomplish the feat. He was also the second player in the game to hit that mark as Hawley’s Jayden Carlisle banked in a 3-pointer to hit the milestone as well.
“It feels great.  A lot of people have talked to me about it. Jenson (Beachy) is a real great friend of mine and he has talked to me about it,” Jeziorski said. “It feels good to be where he is at--to be one of the better players to play and to score that many points is unreal. I can’t thank enough people for it.”
Jeziorski took his game to another level and helped Perham build up a big first half lead.
Jeziorski drained four first half 3-pointers and finished with 20 of his 32 points in the opening half.
Jeziorski said it feels amazing and it was something he dreamt about as a little kid when asked about his 1,000th career point.
“At the beginning of the season, I knew that I needed to get some buckets to get there and my teammates helped me,” Jeziorski said. “I appreciate it that from them. I’m just glad to get that pressure off of me and I couldn’t do it without them.”
Jeziorski was quick to credit his teammates and said the ball was really moving in the first half and his shot was dropping. The Yellowjackets finished with 14 assists as a team. Carter Cresap dished out eight of them, while John LaFond had six and Beachy had five.
While the offense was clicking in the first half, it was the defense which was just as strong. Perham suffocated the Hawley offense in the first half and stymied them throughout much of the half.
“It feels great, as much as we love shooting the ball, we have to work on our defense,” Jeziorski said. “We work really hard on it. We do push-ups in practice if we are not in the right spot. It’s a grind, but we love it. We love getting after it and it’s what we do best.”
Perham head coach Dave Cresap said the first half of defense was as good as they have played all year long.
“We made it very tough for them to score,” Cresap said. “When you get a big lead like that, you are going to have some let ups and we did. We turned the ball over a little bit. But, overall, it was an unbelievable effort and I’m very proud of these kids, they are something special.”
Cresap said Jeziorski relaxed after achieving the career milestone, which he said was unbelievable to have two players reach a career milestone in the same season.
“He played an outstanding basketball game tonight,” Cresap said. “He poured in 32 points. Everything was off of his shoulders and away he went.”
Beachy had a strong first half as well for Perham with 11 of his 21 points coming in the opening half. He was eight of 10 from the field for the game.
Another key for Perham in the win was the play from John LaFond. With Finn Diggins battling foul trouble, LaFond gave the Yellowjackets another consistent effort. He finished with four points, dished out six assists, grabbed two rebounds and picked up a pair of steals as well.
“LaFond was a monster in the first half and he was really special,” Cresap said. “I told him at halftime, how special of a job he did, helping on defense, getting some boards and he is only 5’11” and he beats up on kids that are 6’4.” He did an outstanding job.”
Charlie Rasmussen finished with 14 points on five of six shooting from the field and a perfect four-of-four from the line. He was tenacious on the glass as well with six rebounds.
The Nuggets continued to battle and used a 15-4 run to cut the Perham lead down to 17. However, they couldn’t get it closer in the second half. Jayden Carlisle finished with 17 points. He hit five 3-pointers, including the one he banked in for his 1,000th career point. Jacob Vetter added 11 points for Hawley.
The victory improves the Yellowjackets to 21-1 and 10-0 in the HOL. It also secures the conference crown outright for the second straight season for Perham. Hawley dropped its season mark to 16-4 overall and 6-3 in the HOL.
Perham has a quick turnaround as they travel to Thief River Falls on Feb. 15 for a 7:30 p.m. start with the Prowlers.
HAW 14 31--55
PER 38 41--79
HAW-Gunnar Lawson 3, Jayden Carlisle 17, Chase Libak 6, Jacob Vetter 11, Hayden Grani 6, Noah Glad 12
3-pointers: Lawson, Carlisle 5. Free Throws: 9-12. Team Fouls: 12. Fouled Out: None
PER- Jenson Beachy 21, Charlie Rasmussen 14, Josh Jeziorski 32, Finn Diggins 5, John LaFond 4, Carter Cresap 3
3-pointers: Beachy 2, Jeziorski 6, Diggins, Cresap. Free Throws: 7-8. Team Fouls: 10. Fouled Out: None
Jason Groth
 Groth is a Minnesota Newspaper Association award-winning Sports Editor of the Perham Focus and the Wadena Pioneer Journal. Groth worked in Grand Rapids as the Sports Director at KOZY/KMFY radio for two years and prior to that he was the Sports Editor/Writer for the Grand Rapids Herald-Review for seven years. 
