FacebookEmail Twitter Google+ LinkedIn Pinterest
Sen. Chuck Grassley is literally praying that Donald Trump will sign the border security bill
President Donald Trump has not said whether he will sign the deal to avert another government shutdown. So GOP Sen. Chuck Grassley is praying.
Post to Facebook
Sen. Chuck Grassley is literally praying that Donald Trump will sign the border security bill President Donald Trump has not said whether he will sign the deal to avert another government shutdown. So GOP Sen. Chuck Grassley is praying. Check out this story on USATODAY.com: https://www.usatoday.com/story/news/politics/2019/02/14/government-shutdown-2019-gop-sen-grassley-prays-trump-sign-deal/2869092002/
CancelSend
A link has been sent to your friend's email address.
Posted!
A link has been posted to your Facebook feed.
Join the Nation's Conversation
To find out more about Facebook commenting please read the Conversation Guidelines and FAQs
This conversation is moderated according to USA TODAY's community rules .                                         Please read the rules before joining the discussion.
Sen. Chuck Grassley is literally praying that Donald Trump will sign the border security bill
Eliza Collins , USA TODAY Published 11:17 a.m. ET Feb. 14, 2019 | Updated 2:11 p.m. ET Feb. 14, 2019
CLOSE
Republican Sen. Chuck Grassley says he's praying that President Trump will sign the border security deal into law to prevent a government shutdown. Sen. Lindsey Graham seemed to have more faith than that, saying Trump is "inclined to sign it." (Feb. 14) AP
CONNECT11 TWEET11 LinkedIn11 COMMENT11EMAIL11MORE11
WASHINGTON – Hours before Congress is scheduled to vote on a border security compromise  that would avoid a government shutdown, the question on many lawmakers' minds is whether President Donald Trump will sign it.
So Republican Sen. Chuck Grassley is praying.
Just after the Rev. Eddie Edmonds finished the Thursday prayer, Grassley, an Iowan who is president pro tempore of the Senate, jumped in with a prayer of his own.
"Let's all pray that the president will have wisdom to sign the bills so government doesn't shut down," he said. 
The measure includes $1.375 billion for a barrier along the southern border, and Trump has made clear he's disappointed that it falls far short of the $5.7 billion he has demanded for a wall. His insistence on that money led to an impasse and a shutdown of parts of the federal government in December and January. At 35 days, it was the longest government shutdown on record.
Sen. Chuck Grassley, R-Iowa, asks Attorney General nominee William Barr questions during his confirmation hearing before the Senate Judiciary Committee Jan. 15, 2019.
 (Photo11: Hannah Gaber, USA TODAY)
But Trump has not said whether he plans to sign the compromise legislation. If he vetoes it, another shutdown will occur at midnight Friday. 
CLOSE
President Donald Trump says he's "unhappy" with a hard-won agreement to prevent a new government shutdown and finance construction of more barriers along the U.S.-Mexico border, but he didn't say he wouldn't sign it. (Feb. 12) AP
