Share Adjust Comment Print
NASHVILLE — The Canadiens looked like a team that hadn’t played a game in four days during the first period of Thursday night’s 3-1 loss to the Nashville Predators at the Bridgestone Arena.
The Predators took it to the Canadiens in the first period, outshooting them 16-8, but the score was still 0-0 at the intermission thanks to goalie Carey Price.
“Our first period made it look like we were a team that hadn’t played in four or five days,” coach Claude Julien said after the game. “We weren’t very good. In the second period, we seemed to get our legs going, we seemed to find our game, but we didn’t capitalize on our chances. We had lots of them, and that’s what probably hurt us in the end, is we weren’t able to score in that second period. We were fortunate to come out of the first 0-0 and then we probably deserved better in the second than being down 1-0, and in the third period it was a matter of some costly mistakes that ended up costing us the game.”
The first costly mistake came when Jonathan Drouin attempted a risky cross-ice pass that got batted down and resulted in a goal by the Predators’ Ryan Hartman at 9:49 of the second period.
“It’s a mistake,” Julien said about Drouin’s pass. “I’m not going to point the finger at one player, because it was more than that tonight. As a team, we weren’t sharp, so we didn’t lose because of one player or two players. We lost because we weren’t very sharp. We were sloppy I thought at times and fighting the puck. Like I said, I explained it, first we were rusty, second we probably deserved better, and the third we created some mistakes that ended up giving them the game.”
Brian Boyle and Viktor Arvidsson also scored for the Predators, while Tomas Tatar scored his 18th of the season for the Canadiens.
Canadiens captain Shea Weber, who played in his 900th career NHL game, wasn’t in the mood to talk after it was over.
“I think you guys watched it. You guys know,” Weber said when asked for his thoughts on his team’s performance.
He added: “We were definitely rusty in the first. They were all over us. This is a building where they always come out good in the first as it is. To come out of there 0-0, actually we were satisfied, especially the way we played. We didn’t play very well. I thought we had a lot better second. The score didn’t indicate that, but we came out in the third and it just kind of got away from us at the end.”
Weber received a standing ovation from the Nashville fans early in the game when his milestone was announced.
“It’s obviously special,” he said. “Special, but it would have been nice to get the win.”
Nate Thompson and Dale Weise played their first games for the Canadiens since being acquired in trades with the Los Angeles Kings and Philadelphia Flyers, respectively, skating on the fourth line with Nicolas Deslauriers. Thompson logged 12:54 of ice time, including 3:07 short-handed, and went 6-5 in the faceoff circle (55 per cent). Weise played 10:39 and had a big blocked shot.
“They were good,” Julien said about the newcomers. “I thought they gave us some energy, they gave us some scoring chances. You see Weisey block a big shot, gives your team some energy, some excitement to see guys throwing themselves in front of pucks. So they did their job. Nate was very good for us tonight in the faceoff circle. We had him better than what the papers you guys have is giving you. So a lot of good things from those guys that stepped in tonight for their first game.”
Not enough, though, to help the Canadiens win.
