17:30
This is Gabrielle Canon taking over for Ben Jacobs.
Earlier today, newly inaugurated California governor Gavin Newsom gave his first State of the State address, promising to take on the Trump Administration and enact progressive policies championed by his constituents.
Saying the President’s state of the union was “fundamentally at odds with California values”, Newsom began his speech responding to what he called the “so called border emergency” and spoke about the actions he took Tuesday to pull troops from the Southern border, a move that deviated from his predecessor Jerry Brown who had adhered to Trump’s requests for troops.
“California will not be part of this political theater” he said. “The answer to the White House, with all do respect, is no more division no more xenophobia. No more nativism.”
The new governor also raised eyebrows by announcing he will pump the breaks on completing the high-speed rail project, saying that construction from Los Angeles to San Francisco would be too costly and would take too long. Instead, new plans for the railway would only go through California’s agricultural region in the Central Valley.
Adam Ashton (@Adam_Ashton)
Gavin Newsom is scaling down Schwarzenegger's high speed rail, Jerry Brown's Delta tunnels and Donald Trump's border deployment.
February 12, 2019
He outlined his outlook on water issues in the state, called out problems with the education system, and spoke about the homelessness crisis, announcing the a new commission on homelessness. He shared plans for a new incentive package to address affordability in the state, pushed cities to meet housing goals, and told legislators that he would sign a rent stability package if proposed.
“If we want a California for all, we have to build housing for all”, he said, adding “we cannot defer this anymore” over applause.
Doug Sovern (@SovernNation)
. @GavinNewsom threatens to sue more cities that don’t meet housing goals. Invites leaders of 47 recalcitrant cities to meet next week: “I don’t intend to file suit against all 47, but I’m not going to preside over neglect and denial any longer.” #CASOTS
February 12, 2019
He also shared his plan to help seniors in a “new master plan on aging” that includes a task force on Alzheimer’s headed by former first lady Maria Shriver, and said he wanted to create a “data dividend” that would redistribute the wealth made by tech companies.
Alexei Koseff (@akoseff)
Newsom says in his State of the State speech that he wants to create a "data dividend" for Californians. It sounds like he wants residents to share in the wealth generated from their data by tech companies, but it beats me how that would work. No further details for now.
