Home › Sports! › Sports! #69: Miami Dolphins: Predicting The 2019 NFL Season
Sports! #69: Miami Dolphins: Predicting The 2019 NFL Season
Posted on February 15, 2019 by The Reviewing Network — Leave a comment
Hey, remember when the Dolphins were 3-0?
Yes, I know that joke has gotten old quickly but I don’t care, I have to keep beating the dead horse because the Miami Dolphins gave themselves away, ever since the Brady Belechick era began in New England, the Dolphins have almost never been able to compete with them no matter what. Yes, they’ve won a couple of division titles in 2002 and 2008 but other than that, the Patriots have been dominant no matter what the circumstances.
So, why should the Dolphins even bother to compete? Well, because their new head coach is the Patriots linebacker coach, Brian Flores, surely, he’ll lead the team back to glory days….or not….and look, I get it, hiring somebody who knows the Patriots to a tee to turn your team around is a noble idea but at the same time, what is it really going to lead to? It’s not going to matter in the end because the Dolphins will find a way to fuck it up in the long haul.
The only way I can honestly see the Miami Dolphins getting back in it is if they go all in and try to draft a top tier quarterback this year like Dwayne Haskins, Daniel Jones, or Kyler Murray to be the new franchise guy. That’s the only way, Ryan Tannehill hasn’t made the cut for them since he’s been there and the team has showed brief flashes of promise in the Adam Gase era only to get buttfucked in the long haul.
Yeah, that win over the Patriots last year in Miami was awesome but in the end, it didn’t even matter, New England still won another Super Bowl and the NEFL is in full effect.
At this point, is there any hope for this franchise going into 2019? Let’s take an early look just to see where things might go from here:
WEEK 1: AT NEW YORK GIANTS (0-1)
The first of two trips this year for the Dolphins to New York where they first face the NFC New York team in the Giants and in this one, the Giants should be better suited for this matchup with a much improved roster and the home field advantage. I think the Giants get the best of the Dolphins in this one.
WEEK 2: AT NEW YORK JETS (0-2)
The Dolphins make their second trip to New York in the first two weeks to take on their division rivals and their first game against their former head coach Adam Gase, the new head coach of the Jets, and I think the Jets get the best of the Dolphins in this one.
WEEK 3: BALTIMORE RAVENS (0-3)
The Dolphins’ home opener sees the team face the Ravens with Lamar Jackson now as the starter and if the Ravens can do for Jackson what the Chiefs did for Mahomes last year, the Ravens should spoil the opening party for the Dolphins easily.
WEEK 4: BUFFALO BILLS (0-4)
The Miami Dolphins might end up getting a rookie QB in the draft and might be starting him up depending whether or not Ryan Tannehill is actually on this team by then and with how different this Dolphins team could end up being, I think Buffalo pulls out an upset win in this game.
WEEK 5: AT NEW ENGLAND PATRIOTS (0-5)
Miami has gotten the best luck against the Patriots at their home but in Gillette, not so much. I don’t expect that to change this year either.
WEEK 6: LOS ANGELES CHARGERS (1-5)
After starting the season 0-5, the Dolphins finally get their first win of the season against the Los Angeles Chargers when they come to Miami.
WEEK 7: AT PITTSBURGH STEELERS (1-6)
As fucked as the Steelers could potentially be next season possibly without Antonio Brown or Le’Veon Bell, the Steelers should be able to use home field advantage to get them the win.
WEEK 8: WASHINGTON REDSKINS (2-6)
The Redskins are still a gigantic question mark, do they go for a rookie QB or will Alex Smith actually be back? It’s too soon to tell, the Redskins really don’t have that good of a team either way so I think the Dolphins can get the win here.
WEEK 9: AT BUFFALO BILLS (3-6)
Miami will head up to Buffalo to get revenge on the Bills for the loss in week 4 and will likely pull out a win here.
WEEK 10: BYE WEEK
WEEK 11: NEW YORK JETS (4-6)
The Dolphins welcome back their former head coach and should be able to pull out a win against the Jets in this one to get revenge for the loss earlier in the season.
WEEK 12: AT DALLAS COWBOYS (4-7)
Should be the Thanksgiving day game with the Cowboys having the home field advantage and if they can play as well as they did in the second half in the season, they’ve got a good chance to take down the Dolphins.
WEEK 13: AT CLEVELAND BROWNS (4-8)
The Browns really do look like a viable threat next season if the end of last season is any indication, I think the Browns can easily win this game.
WEEK 14: NEW ENGLAND PATRIOTS (5-8)
Some reason Tom Brady & the Patriots always seem to fuck up at least once a year in Miami and I don’t see that changing this year either.
WEEK 15: CINCINNATI BENGALS (6-8)
The Bengals are also a question mark football team when it comes to their new head coach, I don’t think Zac Taylor can really turn this team so I think Miami can easily pull off the win.
WEEK 16: AT INDIANAPOLIS COLTS (6-9)
The Colts looked really promising going into the second half of the season so if they can play as well as they did there, I think the Colts can pull off the upset win and knock them out of the playoffs.
WEEK 17: PHILADELPHIA EAGLES (6-10)
Whether or not Carson Wentz will be back as the starting QB for the Eagles, it shouldn’t really matter and despite the Dolphins having home field advantage, I think the Eagles still pull out a win in this one.
FINAL PREDICTION: 6-10
Trying to copy the Patriots formula with an unproven head coach in Brian Flores is gonna be really tough for the Dolphins to accomplish, I just don’t seem them breaking out of the funk that they’ve been in the last couple of years.
Follow The Reviewing Network at our Facebook page at Facebook.com/TheReviewingNetwork for continuing updates and debuts for new blog posts and also follow my Twitter feed so you can see new postings right as they are posted.
Advertisements
