5 / 5
Veteran centre Nate Thompson thrilled about joining Canadiens
"It was just too good of an opportunity to pass up and, obviously, playing for the Montreal Canadiens is a once-in-a-lifetime experience."
Share Adjust Comment Print
Former Kings centre Nate Thompson skates ahead of Blues’ Ivan Barbashev (49) during a game in January. Thompson was happy to waive his no-trade clause so the Canadiens could acquire him. Gary A. Vasquez / USA TODAY Sports
NASHVILLE — Over the years, Canadiens fans have heard plenty about players who don’t want to play in Montreal for a number of reasons, including the media and fan scrutiny, the weather, the taxes and — in recent years — the fact the team wasn’t very good.
So, it will be refreshing for Montreal fans to know that Nate Thompson agreed to waive a no-trade clause he had in his contract with the Los Angeles Kings that allowed the trade on Monday that brought the veteran centre to the Canadiens, along with a fifth-round pick at the 2019 NHL Draft, in exchange for a fourth-round pick this year.
“I think just the way they’re playing this year, the mix of veterans and youth they have here,” Thompson said after Thursday’s morning skate in Nashville about waiving the no-trade clause in the final season of his two-year contract worth US$3.3 million. “I played for Claude (Julien) a while back when I was in Boston. It was just too good of an opportunity to pass up and, obviously, playing for the Montreal Canadiens is a once-in-a-lifetime experience.”
That doesn’t mean Thompson was a Canadiens fan while growing up in Anchorage, Alaska.
“I was a Detroit Red Wings fan,” Thompson said with his classic hockey smile, minus a couple of front teeth. “That was still the Original Six. Being from Alaska, you could kind of root for whoever you want. So I was a big Stevie Y (Yzerman) fan.”
Un message de la part de @NateThompson44 珞
A message from Nate Thompson. #GoHabsGo pic.twitter.com/k0MPC4w6oZ
— Canadiens Montréal (@CanadiensMTL) February 14, 2019
Thompson doesn’t have Yzerman’s offensive skills, with 57-77-134 totals in 672 career NHL games with Boston, the New York Islanders, Tampa Bay, Anaheim, Ottawa and Los Angeles before getting traded to Montreal and making his Canadiens debut Thursday night against the Predators. What the 34-year-old does bring is experience to a Canadiens fourth line that has struggled offensively and defensively this season. Thompson is also good in the faceoff circle, winning 53.1 per cent of his draws with the Kings while posting 4-2-6 totals in 53 games and a plus-3, averaging 12:55 of ice time.
“I think I’m a guy who can skate pretty well,” said Thompson, who will wear No. 21 with the Canadiens and start out on a line with Dale Weise and Nicolas Deslauriers. “I bring some physicality, I bring some energy. I try to be good on faceoffs and good on the penalty kill and chip in the odd goal here or there.
“It has been a whirlwind,” Thompson added about the three days since the trade. “We were finishing up a 12-day road trip with L.A. and I got traded on the last day of the road trip. Now, I’m just keeping it going on the road.”
But he’s looking forward to living in Montreal.
“I’ve spent a lot of time there on the road, obviously, and it’s always been a great spot for me with food and everything,” Thompson said. “The history of the city. I’m really excited — especially with my wife coming there — for us to get to know the city a little bit more.”
Thompson knows a few of the Canadiens players, having played with Jonathan Drouin in Tampa and with Jeff Petry on Team USA at world championships. He also has a long history with Canadiens captain Shea Weber.
“I played against him in junior, so we go way back against each other,” Thompson said. “I’m very happy to be on the same team now. He’s buzzed the tower a few times with the puck, so I’m glad to be on the right side of it now.”
