When Lance Stroll rolled out of bed on a wintry Wednesday morning, he did so with a grin from ear to ear.
He had a little extra hop in his step, too. And with good reason.
When Stroll, a Canadian, and Mexican teammate Sergio Perez pulled back the cover on his gleaming, pink and blue Formula One car on stage at the John Bassett Theatre inside the Metro Toronto Convention Centre to reveal the team’s new livery in front of cameras beaming it around the world, they made racing history.
— SportPesa Racing Point F1 Team (@RacingPointF1) February 13, 2019
It was the first time that a Formula One team, in this case the re-branded SportPesa Racing Point F1 Team (formerly Force India) that is owned by a consortium that includes Quebec billionaire Lawrence Stroll, the driver’s pop, launched its campaign on Canadian soil, the “cherry on top” for the excited young Montrealer.
It was, to borrow from an old Toronto FC marketing campaign, a bloody big deal and undoubtedly something for Stroll to smile about.
“It’s tough to put into words, actually,” Stroll said in a one-on-one interview with the Toronto Sun before the official launch/unveiling at the Canadian International Auto Show. “It’s a dream come true, I’d say. New team, a very exciting chapter in my career. We’re launching a car here in Canada, and there’s no better place than home.”
Stroll, a soft-spoken 20-year-old from Montreal who now lives in Europe, is indeed living his dream driving in the most glamorous racing series on the planet.
While so many of his contemporaries are trying to figure out their career path in university, Stroll is about to embark on his third season on the F1 circuit, the pinnacle of motorsports. He understands how different his life is compared to others his age but has already accepted that piloting a F1 car is a job, albeit one that few will ever experience.
Drivers Lance Stroll (right) and Sergio Perez walk onstage during the launch of the new SportPesa Racing Point F1 Team the at the Metro Toronto Convention Centre in Toronto on Wednesday, February 13, 2019. (Ernest Doroszuk/Toronto Sun)
“It is surreal, it is unique,” he admitted. “I don’t see my position any differently than another. I have a task at hand, which gets me out of bed in the morning. I’m the same as any 20-year-old, someone my age, who goes to university or works nine to five.
“Everyone has a job to do, that’s how I see it. But I’m extremely thankful and grateful every day to be where I am. It’s definitely an incredible opportunity that I have, to do what I do.”
Critics would suggest that Stroll got the gig with SportPesa Racing Point because the team is owned by his father. But the kid’s got chops on the track and an extensive background in racing’s minor leagues, with titles in the F3 European Championship (2016), the Toyota Racing Series (2015) and the Italian F4 Championship (2014).
He’s heard the negative voices and, quite frankly, it amounts to nothing more than noise.
“I fuel off them,” Stroll said. “I have a small entourage of people who I trust. I value their opinion on my career. And I stick to those voices. The rest is just background noise. I think I’ve done a fair bit of my talking on the track over the course of the years, leading up to Formula One and Formula One.
“I’m just motivated. It’s an incredible opportunity to work alongside my father. We have the same ambitions, the same vision. As a team — me and my father — we’re approaching this very rationally and we have a vision on it.”
The first two years of Stroll’s young F1 career, both as a teenager with Williams Martini Racing, had plenty of look-away moments. It was mostly a struggle, with a handful of highlights sprinkled in.
Stroll joined Williams in 2017 at the age of 18, becoming the first Canadian in F1 since Jacques Villeneuve (who also drove for Williams), and debuted with three straight retirements before stepping onto the podium — he finished third at the Azerbaijan Grand Prix — in just his eighth race. He was the youngest F1 rookie to ever post a top-three finish.
Drivers Lance Stroll (right) and Sergio Perez pose on the car during the launch of the new SportPesa Racing Point F1 Team the at the Metro Toronto Convention Centre in Toronto on Wednesday, February 13, 2019. (Ernest Doroszuk/Toronto Sun)
“It seems like a long time ago. I’m due for another one,” Stroll said with a laugh. “It was the highlight of my racing career and I didn’t see it coming. I started eighth on the grid and it was just a hectic race, so much happened, then all of a sudden I found myself in second place.
“(Valtteri Bottas) nicked me at the line but I still got third and I stood on a Formula One podium my rookie season. It was mind-blowing, for sure.”
The 2018 campaign was a major disappointment for Stroll, though, with the lowlight being a crash at the Canadian Grand Prix in his home town.
“I banked the lessons that I learned throughout the year” he said. “Onwards and upwards this season. A new chapter. We want to fight for podiums when we can, consistently finish in the points, and we’ll see where that takes us.”
FRESH START HAS STROLL MOTIVATED
As good as the new SportPesa Racing Point F1 Team’s car looked under the bright television lights, there is still plenty of uncertainty how it will perform on the track.
Heck, the same can be said for the entire team, which struggled financially over the last couple of years under the Force India banner before Lawrence Stroll’s group bought it midway through the 2018 season. The financial yoke has been removed now and new sponsors brought on board but many questions about the team’s ability to race with the big boys of F1 have persisted over the winter.
“There’s a lot of motivation with the team at the moment,” Lance Stroll said. “Everyone has a vision for the future and they’ve been punching above their weight for a long time. Now we have a healthier structure in the team. As a group of people, I feel we truly believe we can go above and beyond.
“It’s the early days. We haven’t even started testing yet so we don’t know where we lie compared to our competitors. But we want to fight, we want to be one of the more competitive teams in the field.
Stroll will test the car, which was built at the team’s factory in Silverstone, England, and shipped here for the big unveiling, before the season begins. But the real moment of truth will come when the Formula One season kicks off March 17 with the Australian Grand Prix in Melbourne.
“We’ve been working really hard over the winter … but we won’t really know until we hit the grid in Melbourne,” SportPesa Racing Point Technical Director Andrew Green said during the launch. “We want to be that team that beats people we shouldn’t.”
NOTE: The SportPesa Racing Point F1 Team car will be on display to the general public throughout the 2019 Canadian International AutoShow , Feb. 15-24 at the Metro Toronto Convention Centre.
