Congress passes deal to avert shutdown as Trump plans emergency declaration to build wall – as it happened
Senate votes 83 to 16 to advance a spending package designed to prevent another government shutdown
Play Video
Mitch McConnell: Trump to sign funding bill but declare national emergency – video
Gabrielle Canon in Oakland (now) and Ben Jacobs in Washington (earlier) and Erin Durkin in New York (earlier)
Thu 14 Feb 2019 21.01 EST
First published on Thu 14 Feb 2019 08.54 EST
Follow the latest developments on our new live blog.
Trump to declare national emergency to free up billions for border wall – live
Read more
21:08
Happy Valentine’s Day everyone, it’s been a doozy. Here’s what happened today:
Congress passed a bipartisan agreement preventing the government from shutting down. Trump has pledged to sign it. The bill gives him $1.375bn for his border wall, far less than the $5.7bn requested, and the president is planning to declare a national emergency to get more funding.
Congress approves deal to avert shutdown with Trump poised to declare emergency
Read more
Details on the declaration are scant but critics from both parties were quick to oppose the move, and reportedly, i t will not get through the courts , at least on the first try. Trump administration officials told reporters they plan to win in an appeal.
Trump has gained some weight since his last official physical and based on the weight provided by his doctors, the president is now considered obese .
Is the national emergency a big deal and will it get Trump his wall?
Read more
21:01
Shutdown averted: Congress approves border security agreement
The House passed the spending package tonight with a vote of 300-128, following the Senate’s approval in a vote of 83-16. The majority of Republicans opposed the bill, with 109 voting no.
Matt Fuller (@MEPFuller)
A majority of Republicans are gonna vote no on this spending deal. Democrats also aren’t going to get to 218 votes on this.
Leadership from both parties kinda muddling their message on the victory, but particularly Republicans. Trump isn’t gonna love that many GOP no votes.
The border security compromise, tucked into a sweeping, 1,159-page spending bill, would appropriate $1.375bn for 55 miles of new fencing along the border with Mexico, which is far less than the $5.7bn Trump sought for a concrete or steel wall.
Shutdown deal: Republicans urge Trump to accept as House heads to vote
Read more
The bill next goes to the president, who said he would sign it on Friday preventing a second painful government shutdown , but announced he had plans to declare a national emergency as a way of funding his long-promised border wall with Mexico.
The House is now voting on the bipartisan bill passed by the Senate that will keep the government open. More to come soon!
ABC News Politics (@ABCPolitics)
HAPPENING NOW: House set to vote on border security funding bill to avert government shutdown. https://t.co/OBXDZmiIXG https://t.co/TkcBlVhwE1
February 15, 2019
Matt Fuller (@MEPFuller)
Bit of a feeling here in the House that there may be more Democratic no votes than we first expected on this funding bill.
Could be more in the 20-30 range rather than single digits to a dozen.
19:54
Today the Senate confirmed William Barr as attorney general, over concerns by Democrats that he will not properly oversee the investigation into the Trump campaign’s connections to Russia.
This afternoon, Matt Schlapp — who chairs the American Conservative Union and whose wife Mercedes is the White House director of strategic communications — raised eyebrows with a tweet suggesting there might be merit to those fears.
“Tomorrow will be the first day that President Trump will have a fully operational confirmed Attorney General,” he tweeted. “Let that sink in. Mueller will be gone soon”.
Marcus Baram (@mbaram)
This guy’s wife is the White House Director of Strategic Communications, so it’s not an empty threat... https://t.co/5iQDufBwhC
19:19
Former Starbucks CEO and current presidential hopeful, Howard Shultz, offered Democrats the chance to get him off the ballot today, saying that he’d abandon his campaign if a centrist is nominated, the Washington Post reports .
Shultz hasn’t yet officially announced his bid for 2020, but has been vocal about his plans to run as an independent:
Schultz, who made the comments while visiting The Washington Post, has premised his exploration of a presidential campaign on the assumption that Democrats are likely to nominate a candidate that embraces what he calls “far-left” ideas that will turn off enough moderate voters to open space for an independent candidate.
He has paid for internal polling that he says suggest he would be competitive in a three-way race against President Trump and a liberal Democratic candidate such as Senator Kamala Harris, Senator Elizabeth Warren, or Senator Bernie Sanders”.
18:40
Report: National emergency declaration would be blocked in courts
The president has not yet announced details on his plan to declare a national emergency, but according to ABC News the Justice Department warned the move would be blocked temporarily in the courts. The Trump Administration hopes to move forward through appeal, an official told the news network.
ABC News (@ABC)
MORE: A senior White House official tells @ABC News that the White House is confident the administration can ultimately win the case on appeal. https://t.co/hgqjkOjsTZ
February 14, 2019
Lawyers at the White House, the Department of Homeland Security and at the Pentagon have been working for weeks to iron out different options the president would have to obtain funds for his border wall.
By declaring a national emergency at the border, the president could potentially free up billions of dollars to begin work on construction of a southern border wall. Much of that money would be pulled from the Department of Defense”.
Is the national emergency a big deal and will it get Trump his wall?
Read more
18:27
Democrats are preparing to take on the Trump Administration if he moves forward with his national emergency declaration, the Washington Post reports .
Representative Jerrold Nadler, who chairs the House Judiciary Committee, told the Post today that a joint resolution will be coming soon, that will force Senate Republicans to vote on the president’s divisive and unpopular plan:
‘This is a gross abuse of presidential power’ Nadler said of the news that Trump would declare a national emergency to try to move money around to fulfill his campaign promise. ‘This is an attempt to overturn the basic constitutional doctrine of separation of powers. Congress has the power of the purse. It cannot be tolerated’.
Should the Senate fail to adopt the resolution, or should Trump veto the text, Nadler said ‘we’ll probably go to court after that’. House Democrats, anticipating the president’s move, have discussed a potential legal challenge for what they see as executive overreach”.
Details around Trump’s national emergency declaration are still scant but the President has called a “lid” for the evening, meaning no more news will be released by the White House for now.
Puerto Rico’s governor Ricardo Rosselló threatened a lawsuit against the Trump Administration if the president moves forward with a plan to declare a national emergency to get funding for his wall that diverts funding from disaster relief.
Ricardo Rossello (@ricardorossello)
Is it now Puerto Rico and California (American Citizens) that will pay for the wall? If this is the case, we’ll see you in court. https://t.co/KwDjEloXm2
February 14, 2019
The president has promised that his plan won’t rely on funds appropriated for disasters.
For a better understanding of what will happen if Trump declares a national emergency, here’s an explainer from my colleague Tom McCarthy, answering key questions:
Is the national emergency a big deal and will it get Trump his wall?
Read more
17:32
In the midst of a busy news day, the White House released its second health assessment on the president showing that he “remains in very good health” even though he has put on a few pounds, the Washington Post reports :
Trump, 72, stands 6-foot-3 and weighs 243 pounds, making him overweight, according the memorandum. The president’s weight was reported as 239 pounds last year, and he was advised to watch his diet, exercise more and lose weight.
In the past year, doctors increased Trump’s dose of rovusastatin, a drug used to lower the president’s cardiac risk.
Trump received the Pneumovax 23 and Shingrix immunizations, Conley wrote”.
Though the findings minimized Trump’s weight, the gains pushed the president past the point of overweight and into the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention range for obesity.
Kathryn Watson (@kathrynw5)
The White House chose this chaotic afternoon to announce the results of Trump's annual physical.
He clocked in four pounds heavier this year, making him technically obese. pic.twitter.com/5SOLtGjitH
The president’s BMI was also calculated with his height listed as 6’3, a number that was questioned last year during Trump’s first health assessment.
Matthew Yglesias (@mattyglesias)
If you believe Donald Trump is 6’3” and 243 pounds I don’t know what to say to you. https://t.co/RGtme73Ccg
A tall tale? Accuracy of Trump's medical report – and new height – questioned
Read more
