Spectrum Center ready to shine for NBA All-Star Weekend
Spectrum Center ready to shine for NBA All-Star weekend
By Nate Wimberly | February 15, 2019 at 12:27 AM EST - Updated February 15 at 5:31 AM
CHARLOTTE, NC (WBTV) - A production crew of over 500 people has been prepping the Spectrum Center since last Wednesday and the building is ready to shine for NBA All-Star Weekend.
One thing you won’t see a lot of inside the Spectrum Center is the name Charlotte Hornets. You will see a lot of NBA All-Star but within that branding, you will sense a theme of Charlotte being the center of the basketball universe this weekend.
“Every little aspect of All-Star is constantly focused on and designed to feel like it makes sense for the city that we are in,” said Kevin Dobstaff who is the senior vice president of NBA live programming and entertainment.
The NBA All-Star logo has the honeycomb lay out that the Charlotte Hornets use on their Classic Court. The colors on the logo are similar to the Charlotte Hornets.
“Saturday night, we will see a couple of elements that go back to the ’91 All-Star game,” said Dobstaff. “On Sunday, J. Cole (from Fayetteville, NC) will perform for us at halftime which is a great local tie. Those are the things that are unique to this particular year.”
Probably the biggest difference fans will notice immediately when they walk into the Spectrum Center is the stage right next to the playing court.
It will be concert meets basketball.
The stage will be used by J. Cole on Sunday and will serve as the platform when the NBA All-Stars will be announced to the crowd.
It also has a big video board attached to it.
Every seat is sold for both Saturday and Sunday which means fans will have to sit behind the big screen but their view won’t be blocked when the action is on the court.
“We are able to fly a lot of the materials out or down which exposes all the people seated back there in either the Flight Deck Restaurant or some of the other seating,” siad Dobstaff. "When the production elements are happening, they will have to look at the monitors but otherwise, when the basketball events are happening, they will be able to see the court with no problem.
Events start at the Spectrum Center on Friday with the Rising Stars Game. Then on Saturday it is All-Star Saturday Night with the Skill Challenge, 3 Point Shooting Contest, and the Slam Dunk Competition. Then on Sunday, it’s the main event as the 68th NBA All-Star Game will tip off at 8 p.m.
Copyright 2019 WBTV. All rights reserved.
49
