Norvell (Kay) Kay Granger Senate plots to avoid fall shutdown brawl On The Money: Trump declares emergency at border | Braces for legal fight | Move divides GOP | Trump signs border deal to avoid shutdown | Winners, losers from spending fight | US, China trade talks to resume next week How the border deal came together MORE (R-Texas) announced on Monday night that they had reached an agreement “in principle” ahead of the Feb. 15 deadline for the remaining seven appropriations bills.
The deal, according to multiple congressional sources, would provide $1.375 billion for physical barriers along the U.S.-Mexico border. 
That would include 55 miles of barriers, according to senior congressional aides, though a congressional source separately said that a physical concrete wall was prohibited. 
Democrats dropped their demand to cap the number of Immigration and Customs Enforcement (ICE) detention beds for immigrants taken into custody in the interior of the country, away from the border, at 16,500.
A congressional aide said the deal included 40,520 ICE detention beds. But senior congressional aides argued that the tentative agreement included "enough flexibility to reach the president's requested level of 52,000 beds” because of the president’s ability to shuffle funding within the Department of Homeland Security.
The White House has not yet said if the president will support the deal.  
"We’re not sure yet, to be quite honest," White House deputy press secretary Hogan Gidley said during an interview on Fox News when asked if the deal was something Trump would approve. 
Addison (Mitch) Mitchell McConnell Kids confront Feinstein over Green New Deal Trump selects Kelly Craft for United Nations ambassador Union leader says Green New Deal would make infrastructure bill ‘absolutely impossible’ MORE (R-Ky.) didn’t specifically say that he would support the deal on Tuesday, saying he looked forward to reviewing the full text. 
But he also pointed to two areas where he thought Democrats had caved: on not spending “more than $1, $1, on new border barriers and the idea that we should impose a hard statuary cap on ICE detainees in the interior of our country."
"Fortunately, our Democratic colleagues did abandon those unreasonable positions and the negotiations were able to move forward productively,” McConnell added. 
