Published: Feb 13, 2019 4:25 p.m. ET
Share
Trump reportedly ready to sign agreement
By
White House reporter
Getty Images
President Donald Trump speaks during a meeting with Colombian President Ivan Duque on Wednesday in the Oval Office of the White House.
President Donald Trump said Wednesday he wants to avoid another government shutdown, as he suggested he’d move on his own to fund his proposed border wall.
‘A LOT OF OPTIONS’
Trump wouldn't say if he’d sign the bipartisan border-security agreement reached this week, but made clear he didn’t want to see another shutdown over the issue. Funding for several government agencies expires just after midnight Friday in the absence of a bill passed by Congress and signed by Trump.
“I don’t want to see a shutdown. A shutdown would be a terrible thing,” said Trump — who also told reporters he was looking for “landmines” in the text of the deal.
People familiar with Trump’s plans said he’s likely to sign the agreement, which provides less for border security than he wanted. During an Oval Office meeting with Colombian President Ivan Duque, Trump said he had “a lot of options” for funding his proposed wall. The agreement contains enough money to build only about 55 miles of new fencing.
See: Trump expected to sign border-security deal .
CHINA DEAL COMMENTS
With Treasury Secretary Steven Mnuchin and U.S. Trade Representative Robert Lighthizer in Beijing for trade discussions with Chinese officials, Trump said “it’s going along very well.”
With optimism about those talks in investors’ sights, the Dow Jones Industrial Average DJIA, +0.70%   finished up more than 100 points Wednesday.
Trump also said he’d discuss the “turmoil” in Venezuela with Duque but declined to talk publicly about sending troops there. The U.S. has recognized opposition leader Juan Guaido as Venezuela’s interim president, and demanded that Nicolas Maduro step down.
Receive these updates via email. Sign up to get our daily summary of "Everything President Trump did today." Sign up here.
More from MarketWatch
