Sometimes the forces in the world just line up in everyone’s best interests.
The arrival of Jeremy Lin, midway through a potentially franchise-altering season, is one of those such instances.
No one knows how much a difference Lin is going to make on this team, but, in the moment, his arrival is huge for the team.
As it stands right now, the Raptors have one healthy point guard in Kyle Lowry, who has already twice this year been fallen by back issues that cost him games.
Lin jumps in with Delon Wright having been forfeited as part of the Marc Gasol trade. But his immediate value spikes with Fred VanVleet, Lowry’s primary backup out three to four weeks minimum following surgery to repair a partially torn ligament in his left thumb.
When the idea of bringing in Lin first occurred to the Raptors it was with depth in mind. Right now he’s a necessity for them.
But this works out very well for Lin as well.
The much-traveled veteran of nine NBA seasons is healthy again this year after almost two full seasons of rehab, ironically six months of that time was spent in Vancouver at the Fortius Sport and Health Centre, where the Raptors have held training camp for four of the past five seasons.
Lin loved Canada before his stay in Vancouver. That six months only made the bond tighter.
When Lin finally returned to action this year, it was in Atlanta where playing time was plentiful but winning opportunities were extremely limited. The Hawks — and Lin is very thankful for his time there — are in the early stages of a rebuild. There was Lin, Vince Carter and a whole slew of talented-but-raw kids. Developing is the focus there. Lin was looking for the chance to win.
“I’ve been to the playoffs four times and haven’t been past the first round of the playoffs and I was injured in a couple of those series, but for me to have a chance to do something special with this team — every player, when you grow up, you dream about this. There’s been a lot of highs and lows and I didn’t expect it, but ended up in Atlanta … it was top of the line, but to have a chance to play deep into the playoffs? Yeah, I’m tired of watching and being hurt for two straight years kind of adds to that. I didn’t get a chance to compete so this is awesome.”
Toronto may have been at the at the top of Lin’s destination of choices, but it wasn’t his only option. The Hawks management team, a professional group that is well aware of the limitations they offer a player deep into his career at this point like Lin, willingly agreed to the buyout to give him this chance while freeing up more minutes for their own developing young core and saving a little salary in the process.
There were a few things that tipped the balance in Toronto’s favour when Lin sat down to map out his next destination.
First was the desire he saw and experienced from within the club for his talents.
“They really, really wanted me,” Lin said. “I’ve been around and I’ve been in a lot of different situations. But when the organization as a whole wants you, from front office to coaches to players, that means something.”
Lin said he has been in situations where one of the three of those groups made the intention clear or even two, but this was the first time he heard from all three groups and that hit home with him.
“And then, secondly, obviously this team, what they stand for, what they’ve done in the season,” he said. “I almost feel like I’m cheating, jumping into a 40-something win team.”
Lin also had a third reason, but he got to that as the English-speaking portion of his post-game interview — a number of cameras and media types with Toronto’s Chinese population waited patiently as this went on — wound down.
Lin was born in Torrance, Calif., but as one of the first Americans of Chinese or Taiwanese descent to play in the NBA and one of the few Asian Americans, has attracted an Asian fanbase like no one else in the league today.
When his career took off with the Knicks in the latter portion of the 2012 season when he went on a run that resulted in a string of wins for the Knicks, his popularity skyrocketed. Suddenly, Linsanity was upon us and the whole league was taking notice. The Asian basketball fanbase, both in North America and around the world, adopted him as their own.
Lin admitted he fought this initially.
“I used to run from it. You know?” he said. “Because that’s all anybody’s ever wanted to look for. Like, oh, he’s Asian, he’s Asian, he’s Asian. And I was like, talk about my basketball. But now people can see I can play, I belong in the NBA, and I’ve really embraced just being able to represent Asians, and do it the right way, hopefully.”
Lin became jaded when people began insinuating he was only getting the attention and the publicity because of his ethnic ties, ignoring the fact that he was almost single-handedly winning games with his play.
“So I kind of wanted to run from that a little bit,” Lin admitted. “I would probably say three years down the road, I kind of turned a corner, and I would say being hurt for two straight years, and seeing that my Asian fanbase, I don’t feel like it dropped off one bit. And I haven’t even touched the court. Like, every year I go over to Asia, and I can’t even walk through the airport, it’s insane. So to see them do that after all the highs and lows, but really going through the lows post-Linsanity, which culminated in those injuries, for me, I’m still blown away. And again, that’s fed into why I want to carry myself a certain way.”
The planets just seem to have lined up perfectly for Lin, for the Raptors, and for the huge Asian population in Toronto that wanted nothing more than to have someone like Lin, someone they relate to in such a strong fashion, playing for their hometown team.
To add the kind of playing opportunity made available to him immediately upon arrival is just the icing on the cake.
