MVCHA 1A FINALS: Kahl-less Eagles drop Game 1 to Triad
1  /  1
Back to Gallery
O’FALLON — Heading into the MVCHA Class 1A finals, Bethalto coach Brayden Emerick knew Triad would be a tough nut to crack. And that was if the Eagles had high-scoring junior forward Nolan Kahl.
Without him, it was that much tougher, as Emerick found.
With leading scorer Kahl on the road with his AAA club team, Bethalto dropped a 6-2 decision to Triad in Game 1 of the Mississippi Valley Club Hockey Association finals Thursday night at the McKendree Metro Rec Plex.
“Nolan’s AAA team left today for the playoffs,” Emerick said. “That makes it tough. Our guys actually played pretty well. I don’t think the final score indicated how good they played. But we were missing that one spark he provides. But we’ll have him the rest of the series.
“He’s the kind of player who raises everybody’s level.”
The loss means the Eagles’ backs are to the wall in the best-of-three series, which is set to resume at 7:30 p.m. Monday at the East Alton Ice Arena. If Triad wins Game 2, the Knights will claim the Class 1A championship. A Bethalto victory will extended the series for a decisive Game 3, which would be played at 7:15 p.m. Tuesday at East Alton.
Triad led 2-0 after the first period and extended its lead to 4-1 after two periods.
“It’s tough when you run three defensemen and one is in the penalty box for 12 minutes,” Emerick said.
Emerick referred to Matthew Winter, who received a two0minute minor penalty and a 10-minute major in the second. In all, Bethalto was whistled for five penalties, Triad for four.
Despite the added pressure on the defense, Bethalto goalie Dale Papp came up with 39 saves. The Knights outshot the Eagles 45-12.
“When that happened, we had to move someone else back and that meant having someone else going in the other slot. We don’t dress that many and without Kahl on top of that, it made it really difficult.”
Triad got a pair of goals each from Drew Parres and Daniel Verhaar. Both Bethalto goals were scored by Clark Sasek.
The Knights’ Elliot McAtee got his team on the board first with an unassisted goal with 9:09 left in the first period. Parres scored from an assist by McAtee at 4:12.
In the second period, Triad with up 3-0 when Verhaar scored from assists by Andrew Watts and Ryan Larson.
The Eagles got on the board with 34 seconds remaining in the second period when Sasek scored unassisted. But Parres scored his second goal with 13 seconds left in the second, assisted by Cole Ebersoldt, making it 4-1.
In the third period, the Knights scored two unanswered goals to go up 6-1.Watts scored from an assist by Jordan Lewis and Verharr scored with 7:56 left, assisted by Watts.
Bethalto’s Sasek capped the scoring with 6:39 left with his second unassisted goal.
“We know what we need to do (Monday),” Emerick said. “I know this team and they’ll be ready.”
Recent News
