Roncalli turns back Britton-Hecla on senior night
By Colton Hall Special to the American News
Feb 14, 2019
Buy Now
Aberdeen Roncalli’s Jami Ewart, center, puts up a shot between Britton-Hecla’s Jenna Werner, left, and Mya Hagenson during the first half of Thursday night’s game at the Roncalli High School gym. Ewart made the basket to eclipse the 1,000 point mark in her high school career. American News photo by John Davis
Buy Now
Britton-Hecla’s Mya Hagenson, left, tries to keep the ball from Aberdeen Roncalli’s Allison Dix, right, during the first half of Thursday night’s game at the Roncalli High School gym. In the background are the Cavaliers’ Jori Ewart and the Braves’ Emma Storely. American News photo by John Davis
Save
On Aberdeen Roncalli’s girls basketball senior night, the Cavs cruised to a 59-20 win over Northeastern Conference opponent Britton-Hecla Thursday at Roncalli.
For Roncalli senior guard Jami Ewart, it was a night to remember for another reason. Ewart scored 10 points that put her over the 1000-point mark for her career.
Ewart needed at least seven points to reach the career milestone, and she got the job done with her first shot of the second quarter.
Fellow senior Allison Dix scored four of her — and the team’s — first six points quickly, with the other bucket coming from Ewart, as the Cavs ran out to a 18-0 run before Britton-Hecla would answer before the end of the first quarter.
“That was big,” Roncalli head coach Derek Larson said. “We were a little stagnant to start things off, but it was great that (Dix) got us started.”
In the second quarter, junior center Mariah Winegar, who led Roncalli with 16 points, started the Cavaliers off with a couple of quick buckets on the inside.
That’s when it happened.
Roncalli made a defensive stop and got the ball to Ewart, who did the rest by hitting a left-elbow jump shot that gave her 1,000 career points.
“She had no idea, and that’s what made it even more special,” head coach Derek Larson said of Ewart. “That truly just goes to show how unselfish she is, and it’s a big accomplishment for her to be the third person in program history to reach 1,000.”
Ewart would go on to make one more bucket before she would be pulled, and she was nothing but smiles.
“I just shot it, and didn’t think about it, but it was an amazing feeling especially when we made it happen on senior night,” Ewart said after her accomplishment. “My teammates helped me a lot along the way, and I’ve got to give them a lot of credit.”
The Cavaliers went into halftime with a 38-7 lead.
The Braves got on the board to start things off in the third, but the Cavaliers would continue their dominant performance by going on a 9-0 run when Ewart scored her final bucket plus seven straight points from Winegar.
“That was a good little run for us,” Larson said. “It gave us a little more cushion, helped us to play with a lead.”
With the game well in hand, both teams would put underclassman in to close out the fourth quarter.
Emma Storley and Perris Fellows led Britton-Hecla with eight points each.
A dominant win like this can give a team a lot of confidence, but Larson isn’t celebrating just yet.
“We’ve got a couple of big games this weekend,” Larson said. “It’s important for us to finish strong as we get closer to the end of the season.”
Roncalli will travel to Clark/Willow Lake Saturday. Tip-off is set for 6:15 p.m.
Roncalli 59 Britton-Hecla 20
Northeastern Conference game at Roncalli.
Roncalli 18 20 11 10 — 59
Britton-Hecla 2 5 9 4 — 20
RONCALLI (13-4): Jami Ewart 10, Megan Streier 3, Allison Dix 6, Mariah Winegar 16, Morgan Fiedler 4, Hannah Kuck 3, Jeci Ewart 2, Kelsey Peterson 3, Abby Hanson 4, Elissa Hammrich 4.
BRITTON-HECLA (4-12): Emma Storley 8, Perris Fellows 8, Mya Hagerson 4.
3-pt FG — RON 2 (Streier 1, Kuck 1); BH 3 (Storley 2, Fellows 1). Fouls — RON 13; 9. Fouled out — None. Turnovers — RON 10; BH 20.
Tiospa Zina 54
