By The Atlanta Voice | on February 24, 2019
Regions Bank on Friday formally unveiled the company’s latest branch that is now open to the public as part of the bank’s long-term strategy to serve more customers and communities across metro Atlanta. The Sugar Hill branch is the third Regions location to open in the Atlanta area since late last year, joining the North Decatur Square branch that opened in January and the […]
By The Atlanta Voice | on February 24, 2019
By Ricardo Alonso-Zaldivar | Associated Press
With health care a top issue for American voters, Congress may actually be moving toward doing something this year to address the high cost of prescription drugs. President Donald Trump, Democrats trying to retire him in 2020, and congressional incumbents of both parties all say they want action. Democrats and Republicans are far apart on whether to empower Medicare to […]
By The Atlanta Voice | on February 23, 2019
By Michael Tarm | Associated Press
Prosecutors paint dark portrait of manipulative R. Kelly Prosecutors on Saturday painted a dark portrait of a manipulative and sometimes violent R. Kelly, describing how he repeatedly sought out underage girls for sex, including one he encountered at her 16th birthday party and another who met the R&B star while he was on trial for child pornography. The accounts emerged […]
By The Atlanta Voice | on February 23, 2019
By Dake Kang | Associated Press
North Korea leader Kim Jong Un was on a train Sunday to Vietnam for his second summit with President Donald Trump, state media confirmed. Kim was accompanied by Kim Yong Chol, who has been a key negotiator in talks with the U.S., and Kim Yo Jong, the leader’s sister, the North’s official Korean Central News Agency reported. TV footage and […]
By The Atlanta Voice | on February 22, 2019
Associated Press
President Donald Trump says he is getting a “complete briefing” on a Coast Guard officer accused of stockpiling guns and compiling a hit list of prominent Democrats and network TV journalists. Trump told reporters Friday afternoon that he would be getting a “very complete briefing in about two hours.” He added that it was a “very sad thing.” Forty-nine-year-old Lt. […]
By The Atlanta Voice | on February 22, 2019
By Sara Burnett and Michael Tarm | Associated Press
R. Kelly, the R&B star who has been trailed for decades by allegations that he violated underage girls and women and held some as virtual slaves, was charged Friday with aggravated sexual abuse involving four victims, including at least three between the ages of 13 and 17. In a brief appearance before reporters, Cook County State’s Attorney Kim Foxx announced […]
By Jeremiah Long | on February 22, 2019
Save Money on Your Property Taxes… Apply for 2019 Homestead Exemption Now!
By The Atlanta Voice | on February 22, 2019
By Jada Haynes | The Atlanta Voice
As Black History Month draws to a close, a few Atlanta-area schools are keeping the celebrations going. Here are five BHM events schools have to offer for their students, parents and the general public: “Black History Month Parade” Feb. 23  | South Atlanta High School Fresh off of three Super Bowl performances, South Atlanta High’s band will perform at the annual […]
By Martel Sharpe | on February 22, 2019
By James A. Washington | The Atlanta Voice
Have you ever consulted God before you made that stupid mistake or very dumb decision? I mean, is God in your inner circle of friends and family? Is He a part of that group in whom you confide about your most personal problems, your deepest feelings? Is He allowed to know your real goals, your real dreams, those things you […]
By The Atlanta Voice | on February 22, 2019
Ford Motor Company Fund, the philanthropic arm of Ford Motor Company, is offering an opportunity for college students, alumni, faculty and administrators at historically Black colleges and universities (HBCUs) to submit an innovative proposal that addresses mobility needs on campus or in their community. The HBC-You Mobility Challenge is officially open and details regarding the program can be found at fgb.life. […]
Posts navigation
