Power play would have helped Canadiens against Predators
Montreal went 0-for-3 on the power play Thursday night and lost 3-1 to Nashville.
Share Adjust Comment Print
NASHVILLE — It would certainly help the Canadiens if they could score more often on the power play.
The Canadiens went 0-for-3 on the power play Thursday night and lost 3-1 to the Nashville Predators, who got goals from Ryan Hartman, Brian Boyle and Viktor Arvidsson. Tomas Tatar scored for the Canadiens.
Not surprisingly, this game was a goaltending battle between Carey Price and Pekka Rinne, with the Predators outshooting the Canadiens 38-35. The Canadiens’ record fell to 31-19-7, but they still hold the first wild-card playoff spot in the Eastern Conference.
Price kept the Canadiens in the game early when they were being outshot 10-1 in the first 11 minutes and 16-8 in the first period. Hartman’s goal came at 9:49 of the second period after he batted down a dangerous cross-ice pass by Jonathan Drouin coming out of the Canadiens’ zone. Hartman then passed the puck to Craig Smith at the blue line and headed to the net, where he backhanded a rebound out of mid-air past Price.
Tatar tied it up at 5:26 of the third period, scoring his 18th goal of the season on a nice setup from Andrew Shaw, before Boyle scored the winner at 8:36 of the third period, beating Price with a low slapshot after taking a pass from P.K. Subban. Arvidsson provided the final dagger at 11:00 of the third period after Canadiens defenceman Jordie Benn lost the puck at centre ice.
You might have figured the power play wouldn’t have much of a say in this game for either team — and it didn’t. Coming into the game, the Canadiens ranked 30th in the NHL on the power play with a 13.5 per cent success rate. The only team worse was the Predators, at 13.1 per cent.
Not surprisingly, the Predators also went 0-for-3 on this night.
The Canadiens have had success this season despite their power play, but this was another game where a power-play goal — or two — would have really helped. Heading into the game, they were 4-for-19 over the previous six games for a 21 per cent success rate.
“I don’t think we’re shooting for a percentage,” Tatar said after Thursday’s morning skate. “We didn’t have a good start — we all know that, you guys know that. We’re trying to get better. I think the last five games we’ve improved a lot, we’ve scored a few goals. Obviously, we had a big opportunity against Toronto where we didn’t score, but I think we’re headed in the right direction. If we continue working this way, we want to get that power play going before the end of the (regular) season. It’s a big part of the league right now. You need your specialty teams to be rolling, and I think we’re working on it.”
They’ll need to work harder.
The Canadiens were flying to Tampa after the game, where they will play the Lightning Saturday night (7 p.m., SNE, CITY, TVA Sports, TSN 690 Radio).
