Sarah Gray
Feb. 14, 2019, 2:02 AM
President Donald Trump turns to House speaker Nancy Pelosi of Calif., as he delivers his State of the Union address to a joint session of Congress on Capitol Hill in Washington, as Vice President Mike Pence watches, Tuesday, Feb. 5, 2019.
Doug Mills/The New York Times via AP, Pool
The deadline to avoid another partial government shutdown is Friday, February 15.
Lawmakers from both houses of Congress and both parties have been working to put together a deal to keep the government open and fund border security — including some funds for a barrier.
The bill is 1,159 pages long, and according to The Washington Post, lawmakers finalized the text just before midnight on Wednesday.
If you don't have time to slog through 1,159 pages of a bill, the Senate Appropriations Committee released a 13-page summary, which you can read below.
President Donald Trump has not yet revealed whether he will sign this bill; it doesn't contain his requested $5.7 billion for a US-Mexico border wall. It provides $1.375 billion for 55 miles of a border barrier in Texas.
If Congress doesn't pass a funding bill and President Donald Trump doesn't sign it, the government will partially shut down again after Friday, February 15.
Lawmakers from both houses of Congress and both parties have been working to put together an appropriations deal to keep the government open and fund border security — including some funds for a barrier along the US-Mexico border.
Trump has not revealed whether he will sign this bill. It doesn't contain his requested $5.7 billion for a border wall, but rather it provides $1.375 billion for 55 miles of a border barrier in Texas.
The bill is 1,159 pages long (and you can read it here ), or you can read the 13-page summary from the Senate Appropriations Committee below:
More: Congress shutdown 2019 Shutdown Border Security
Popular
A woman who retired early at 38 says 4 strategies can help anyone save big without pinching pennies
Popular
Apple is expected to launch new AirPods later this year — here are the features we want to see
Popular
