Pelosi: Democrats Will Review Options if Trump Declares National Emergency
Trump to Sign Border Bill but Also Declare National Emergency
Four Freshman House Democrats Intend to Vote Against Border-Funding Deal
What the Border Deal Would Do
Pence: Trump 'Evaluating' Spending Bill and Authority on Border Security
See only Highlights
LOAD NEWER POSTS
Pelosi: Democrats Will Review Options if Trump Declares National Emergency
House Speaker Nancy Pelosi (D., Calif.) said Democrats would review their options should President Trump declare a national emergency, but held off from saying Democrats would automatically bring up a resolution of disapproval.
"We have to see what the president actually says," she said.
White House Press Secretary Sarah Sanders, asked Thursday afternoon if the White House was ready for legal challenges to a national emergency declaration,  said, “We are very prepared but there shouldn’t be [a legal challenge]. The president is doing his job. Congress should do theirs.”
Natalie Andrews, Rebecca Ballhaus
Twitter
Trump to Sign Border Bill but Also Declare National Emergency
President Trump plans to sign the spending bill that Congress was set to pass later Thursday and will then declare a national emergency to get more funding for border barriers,Senate Majority Leader Mitch McConnell said.
"He's prepared to sign the bill," Mr. McConnell said Thursday on the Senate floor, after a conversation with the president. "He will also be issuing a national emergency declaration at the same time."
Several minutes later  the White House confirmed Mr. McConnell's comments, saying the president would take “executive action—including a national emergency” to build a wall and stop what it said was a national security crisis at the border.
The declaration of a national emergency could enable Mr. Trump to divert funds from elsewhere to fund the wall. Democrats are expected to challenge any efforts to move money around without congressional approval.
Mandel Ngan/Agence France-Presse/Getty Images
Twitter
Four Freshman House Democrats Intend to Vote Against Border-Funding Deal
A small group liberal House Democrats plans to oppose a funding deal that would prevent a government shutdown, leaving less wiggle room for Republicans and Democrats pushing to pass the legislation.
Reps. Alexandria Ocasio-Cortez (D., N.Y), Ayanna Pressley (D., Mass.), Ilhan Omar (D., Minn.), and Rashida Tlaib (D., Mich.) said in a statement Thursday that the funding package gives too much money to immigration-enforcement authorities and that they intend to vote against it.
“We want to be abundantly clear: this is not a rebuke of federal workers or those who depend on the services they provide, but a rejection of the hateful policies, priorities, and rhetoric of the Trump Administration,” the four freshmen lawmakers said.
Large-scale Democratic defections could complicate the bill’s future, though some Republicans are expected to support it. Many other progressive lawmakers have indicated that they will support the bill despite their qualms about some of its provisions.
“I will be supporting the agreement to keep government open,” Rep. Ro Khanna, a progressive Democrat from California, wrote on Twitter. “Our negotiators got a lot of our priorities funded, denied the president funding for his wall, and supported smart border security. This is the type of pragmatic approach my constituency seeks.”
Alexandria Ocasio-Cortez plans to vote against the border-funding deal.Mark Wilson/Getty Images
Andrew Duehren
Twitter
Sen. Alexander Sees No Late Landmines in Spending Bill
President Trump warned earlier this week that he was worried about hidden "landmines" in the bill. On Fox News, Sen. Lamar Alexander (R., Tenn.) said those concerns turned out to be unfounded.
Of landmines, he said: "We haven't seen any. This bill has been out there for a long time. ... For the most part we have had plenty of time to read the bill." He noted tha there were some amendments to the homeland security portion, including border spending. "We have been reviewing that yesterday, and the bill this morning. It looks good to me."
ALEX EDELMAN/CNP/ZUMA PRESS
Twitter
What the Border Deal Would Do
Funding for many government agencies is set to expire at 12:01 a.m. Saturday unless Congress passes spending legislation and President Trump signs it into law. The seven-bill package being voted on Thursday would fund the government for the rest of the fiscal year, which runs through September.
The bipartisan deal, while supplying far less than the $5.7 billion that Mr. Trump had demanded to build a border wall, gives both parties political victories. Republicans touted the 55 new miles of physical barriers that will be built in the Rio Grande Valley, as well as additional investments in border security. The bill includes funding for new equipment at ports of entry, 600 new Customs officers, opioid detection equipment and other technology.
President Trump delivers remarks at the Major County Sheriffs and Major Cities Chiefs Association Joint Conference on Wednesday.Michael Reynolds/Zuma Press
Highlights,
