West Florida’s frantic pace has Jaguars on right track in first round region win
Jaguars overcome first-half struggles, third quarter deficit to beat Gadsden County and reach Region 1-5A semifinal
Post to Facebook
West Florida’s frantic pace has Jaguars on right track in first round region win Jaguars overcome first-half struggles, third quarter deficit to beat Gadsden County and reach Region 1-5A semifinal Check out this story on pnj.com: https://www.pnj.com/story/sports/high-school/basketball/2019/02/14/west-floridas-frantic-pace-leads-first-round-region-win/2878703002/
CancelSend
A link has been sent to your friend's email address.
Posted!
A link has been posted to your Facebook feed.
Join the Conversation
To find out more about Facebook commenting please read the Conversation Guidelines and FAQs
Comments
This conversation is moderated according to USA TODAY's community rules .                                         Please read the rules before joining the discussion.
West Florida’s frantic pace has Jaguars on right track in first round region win
Bill Vilona, Special to the News Journal Published 11:27 p.m. CT Feb. 14, 2019 | Updated 12:14 p.m. CT Feb. 15, 2019
CLOSE
West Florida standout Khadija Chambless recaps the Jaguars' dramatic district championship win over South Walton. Eric J. Wallace, ejwallace@gannett.com
CONNECT11 TWEET11 LinkedIn11 COMMENT11EMAIL11MORE11
 
West Florida head coach ieasha Stallworth-Ridgeway leads the Jaguars to a regional quarterfinal win on Thursday.
 (Photo11: Special to the News Journal)
 
The team’s locker room door remained shut at halftime and West Florida High girls basketball coach Ieasha Stallworth-Ridgeway was in no hurry to leave.
“We needed to talk a little bit,” she said, with wry grin.
The players got the message.
Without any warmup, the Jaguars limited mistakes when it counted most and revved into a 19-6 run to pull away from Gadsden County High for a 66-55 win in Thursday’s first round of the Region 1-5A playoffs.
“It was ugly at first, but they figured it out,” Stallworth said.
The win advanced the Jaguars (20-6) into the next round for the first time in three seasons. They will face Florida State University High from Tallahassee in Tuesday’s region semifinal
The home court will be learned Friday when the Florida High School Athletic Association updates pairings.
After a turnover filled first half Thursday that was uncharacteristic of the season, Stallworth reminded the players of the game’s significance.
“We didn’t do all of this preparation to let one game, one moment, or one play determine our future,” she said. “We needed to make sure how important this was and that we were not coming back out until we were ready to play basketball.”
When West Florida plays the way Stallworth wants, it’s basketball at full fury. There is no deliberation on offense, no relent on a full-court pressure defense.
With ability to sub out the entire starting lineup, this has how Stallworth demands players to produce.
“We go 100 miles per-hour the entire game because I have the personnel to do that,” she said. “We have a team that really understand what it takes to play and win.”
One of the players who gets it best is senior guard Khadija Chambless, a four-year starter who can hit shots from anywhere.
Chambless pulled off a spin move and 3-pointer Thursday from inside the half-court line as time expired in the third quarter. She finished with a team-high 17 points.
It continued her season-long consistency.
“Hey, that kid has been surprising us all season,” said Stallworth, whose team a week ago won its third District 1-5A title in the past five years. “She hit her 1,000 point mark this year and it’s just trying to keep moving forward with that momentum.
“It’s about her realizing that she is a great player. She has to be a floor leader. She has to rally the team and always keep us on track in able to win.”
Chambless’ buzzer shot completed a turnaround in the quarter’s final three minutes. A three point deficit was now a 48-42 lead.
Gadsden County (14-7), located just west of Tallahassee, never pulled closer. The Jaguars expanded into a double-digit lead and several of Gadsden County players were visibly winded in the fourth quarter.
“I have a pretty deep bench,” Stallworth said. “We want to keep the tempo going and when a team only has six or seven kids that can be in the game, we want to run them out.”
Sophomore Tajah Spaulding scored 12 points, including 10 in the first half as the game went back and forth.
Junior Mikeahia Toler and freshman Amari Franklin each had nine points.
It’s been a team Stallworth has enjoyed coaching.
“Their fight, their ability to work when no one is in the gym or here supporting us is what I take,” she said. “The girls ability to realize we’re all we have and we’re all we need.”
That proved plenty enough in the first round of the playoffs.
Bill Vilona is a retired Pensacola News Journal sports columnist and current senior writer for Pensacola Blue Wahoos/Studer55. He can be reached at bvilona@bluewahoos.com.
 
