ACCESS TO 26 EU COUNTRIES
Schengen Visas. Travel Anywhere, Anytime & Do Anything.
How to Apply for a Schengen Visa
Whether you are travelling to one country or all of them, your Schengen Visa must be processed at the embassy of the country which is your main, or first, destination.
You do not need this visa if you are a holder of an EU passport (this also applies to citizens of Bulgaria, Cyprus and Romania), or a residence permit holder of a Schengen state (an entitlement of up to three months stay).
100% secure. We never share your email or credentials.
Schengen Visas Made Simple
4 Simple steps to apply for a Schengen Visa
During the process of your Schengen Visa application, a specialised visa consultant will be in touch to help and support you and answer any questions you may have.
1
Appointment Booking
Once you have made payment online, you will then be able to schedule a time to talk to one of our Schengen Visa Coordinators. They will arrange a suitable date and time for you to attend the visa processing centre. You will also have an opportunity to request our help with any documents missing from your application. We fill in the Application Form for Schengen visas using the information you provide online  to secure your appointment and send it to you together with a complete documents request list and the confirmation of your appointment. As IAM is one of the few agencies partnered with multiple consulates and embassies, it allows us to book appointments much quicker, have insight into available time slots, and avoid unnecessary delays.
2
Documents Checking
IAM’s team will help you to collect the required documents and to check your prepared application to make sure your application has the highest possible prospect of success. We also provide you with a documents pack that lists all the required documents for your Schengen Visa.
The fee for which we help you with thevisa application is 92.40 GBP (excluding Embassy Fees of between 50 – 145 GBP depending on currency fluctuations).
3
Visa Application
When applying for a Schengen Visa, you must attend your Appointment at the Visa Application Centre in person to submit your biometric information, and pay the visa and service fees. Once your visa is issued, you will be informed by email or text message. Your visa processing time varies and normally takes from 3 to 15 working days. As IAM is partnered with consulates and embassies, we offer a premium service which allows you, the applicant, to have us go with you to the Visa Application Centre, allow you to bypass queues and help you submit the application.
4
Visa Collection
If you are unable to collect your passport by yourself due to unforseen circumstances, our representatives can arrange for collection. Alternatively, you may choose to have your application sent back by registered mail when you make your visa application.
immigrationandmigration
Our mission is to ensure that you, as the customer, are able to successfully aquire a Schengen Visa swiftly and securely.
