February 14, 2019 3:44 pm
Updated: February 14, 2019 10:11 pm
Donald Trump to declare national emergency over border wall, White House says
By   Staff The Associated Press
WATCH: Senate passes border security spending bill, Trump expected to sign while declaring national emergency over wall
Listen
U.S. President Donald Trump will sign the government funding bill — and issue a national emergency on the border, U.S. Senate Majority Leader Mitch McConnell said Thursday.
In a statement, White House press secretary Sarah Huckabee Sanders also said: “President Trump will sign the government funding bill, and as he has stated before, he will also take other executive action — including a national emergency — to ensure we stop the national security and humanitarian crisis at the border.”
WATCH: Donald Trump to declare national emergency over border wall: McConnell
Sanders said that means the president is “once again delivering on his promise to build the wall.”
Trump’s signing of the funding bill, which has been approved by both Senate and the House, will mean that another partial government shutdown will be averted.
WATCH: Pelosi threatens Trump on setting precedent for national emergencies
Help us improve Globalnews.ca
Story continues below
The bill will have departments running through the fiscal year, but without the $5.7 billion Trump wanted for the border wall with Mexico. The bipartisan agreement provides under $1.4 billion — enough for just 55 miles of new barriers and fencing.
Declaring an emergency would allow Trump to invoke executive powers to try to shift money to wall-building from elsewhere in the federal budget.
READ MORE:  U.S. Congress poised to vote on bill to avert 2nd government shutdown
House Speaker Nancy Pelosi said Thursday she may consider legal action against Trump if he does declare a national emergency.
“It’s important to note that when the president declares this emergency, first of all, it’s not an emergency,” Pelosi said.
She added there are actual emergencies in the U.S., citing the Parkland school shooting which occurred one year ago today.
WATCH: Schumer says Trump declaring national emergency would be ‘gross misuse’ of presidency. 
“You want to talk about a national emergency? Let’s talk about today, the one-year anniversary of another manifestation of the epidemic of gun violence in America. That’s a national emergency.”
The funding bill passed in Senate with a 83-16 vote, and on Thursday evening passed the House 300 to 128.
Trump’s signature on the bill will end the raucous legislative saga that commenced before Christmas and eventually led to the historically long 35-day partial federal shutdown.
WATCH: Nancy Pelosi signs bipartisan spending bill to avert government shutdown
Trump yielded on the shutdown Jan. 25 after public opinion turned against him and congressional Republicans.
The fight left both parties dead set against another shutdown. That sentiment weakened Trump’s hand and fuelled the bipartisan deal, a pact that contrasts with the parties’ still-raging differences over health care, taxes and investigations of the president.
— With files from Global News
WATCH: U.S. senators react to possible national emergency declaration by Trump
Get daily local headlines and alerts
© 2019 The Canadian Press
