Close
1 of 4
Shane Thomas | The Valdosta Daily TimesValdosta State guard Keshawn Ingram (2) shoots a reverse layup during the second half against Mississippi College on Thursday at The Complex.
Shane Thomas | The Valdosta Daily TimesValdosta State guard Beau Justice (12) shoots a 3-pointer during the second half against Mississippi College on Thursday at The Complex.
Shane Thomas | The Valdosta Daily TimesValdosta State guard Sonya Franklin (11) goes in for a layup against Mississippi College's Coco Hobson (15) during the second half of a game Thursday at The Complex.
Shane Thomas | The Valdosta Daily TimesValdosta State guard Crystal Townsend (21) battles for a rebound during the fourth quarter of a game against Mississippi College Thursday at The Complex.
featured
Guess who's back: Resurgent Blazers smash Choctaws for fifth straight win
Resurgent Blazers smash Choctaws for fifth straight win
Shane Thomas
Feb 14, 2019
Shane Thomas | The Valdosta Daily TimesValdosta State guard Keshawn Ingram (2) shoots a reverse layup during the second half against Mississippi College on Thursday at The Complex.
Shane Thomas | The Valdosta Daily TimesValdosta State guard Beau Justice (12) shoots a 3-pointer during the second half against Mississippi College on Thursday at The Complex.
Shane Thomas | The Valdosta Daily TimesValdosta State guard Sonya Franklin (11) goes in for a layup against Mississippi College's Coco Hobson (15) during the second half of a game Thursday at The Complex.
Shane Thomas | The Valdosta Daily TimesValdosta State guard Crystal Townsend (21) battles for a rebound during the fourth quarter of a game against Mississippi College Thursday at The Complex.
VALDOSTA –– The Valdosta State Blazers (19-5, 12-4 Gulf South Conference) topped 100 points for the sixth time this season, dispatching Mississippi College (5-16, 2-14) 106-90 Thursday night.
Beau Justice scored a game-high 27 points for the Blazers, who won their fifth straight game. Winston Morgan sizzled with 26 points, erupting for eight triples as the Blazers shot 59.3 percent for the game and buried 14-of-28 from long range.
"We're coming together at the right time," Morgan said. "Tonight, we wanted to send a message to the rest of the league that, at first we were No. 1-ranked and we kind of had a little slump but I think we're playing our best basketball right now and I want everybody to see that for sure."
Junior big man Bryce Smith had 17 points and six rebounds, senior Greg Zuppas added 15 points and five assists and Clay Guillozet finished with 12 points, six rebounds, three assists and three steals.
Blazers coach Mike Helfer praised his team's focus and approach to the game from the opening tip. The Blazers led the Choctaws 51-32 at the half, shooting a blistering 62.1 percent from the floor and held the Choctaws' offense to under 43 percent shooting through the first 20 minutes.
"I thought the No. 1 key was to come out and not be thinking about Delta State because we know that's a big game on Saturday," Helfer said. "In any sport in Valdosta, if you play Delta State, that's gonna be a big game. We wanted to come out and focus on this game tonight and our guys came out with some pep in their step. They were energetic, I thought we were excited to play –– I thought that was more critical than any strategy I could come up with for the game."
With the loss, Mississippi College has lost three straight games and fell to 1-7 on the road. The Blazers improved to 11-2 at home.
Morgan had 17 first-half points, drilling 6-of-8 field goals and 5-of-7 from 3-point land. Justice also had a big first half with 12 points as the Blazers led for all but 15 seconds in the first half.
A steal by Morgan and a triple by Smith gave the Blazers their largest lead of the night at 29 points with 5:57 left in the game. After a recent stretch that saw the Blazers drop three of five games in conference play, the Blazers are in the midst of a resurgence. A big reason why, Helfer says, is rediscovering their penchant for pushing the pace, attacking early and often.
"I think our guys have been energetic," Helfer said of the winning streak. "We've kind of adjusted how we've played. We went back to playing fast and trying to create opportunities in transition and if we don't have it, that's fine, we're gonna try to score in the half court. Just continue to play aggressive. Instead of playing on our heels, let's be on our toes and I think that's been the biggest adjustment for our team."
The Blazers host the Delta State Statesmen on Saturday. The Statesmen have won the last two meetings against the Blazers dating back to last season's GSC Tournament.
"They're very organized, they rebound the ball very, very well –– that's what helps them," Morgan said of Delta State. "When they miss shots, they get other opportunities and they bring it out and run the clock again and it wears you down as a team. That's going to be a big emphasis for us when we come in on Saturday."
VSU women 63
Miss. College 55
Despite having a 23-point lead whittled down to five points in the closing seconds, the VSU women (17-7, 11-5 GSC) held on to take down Mississippi College (6-16, 2-14) 63-55 in the opener.
Sonya Franklin scored 14 of her game-high 20 points in the first half as the Blazers were outscored 39-24 in the second half. Franklin credits the Choctaws intensity for making a game of things in the second half.
“The second half, they came out with more intensity and I guess we had kind of gone back into a chill stage,” Franklin said. “We kept our composure and finished the game.”
Though they committed 24 turnovers in the game, the Blazers knocked down 20-of-27 free throws –– 11-of-16 in the second half –– to keep the Choctaws at bay.
VSU held Mississippi College to just 5-of-25 shooting in the first half and led 39-16 at intermission.
The Blazers shot 46.4 percent (13-of-25) from the floor in the first 20 minutes.
“I knew they were gonna make an adjustment out of halftime,” Blazers coach Carley Kuhns said. “I thought our defensive effort in the first half was great –– to hold them to 16 points in a half. I knew they were going to come out with much more intensity on both ends of the floor and they did and I don’t think we matched it to start out of halftime. 
“They hit some tough shots and just chipped away and chipped away. We had some careless turnovers that led immediately to points for them, which just gave them more energy and more momentum. Luckily, we had some kids step up and make plays. I thought Sonya Franklin had an excellent game and we had the ability to knock down some free throws down the stretch.”
Kayla Bonilla added 12 points for the Blazers, who have won six of their last seven games.
Jamilah Sanders had 16 points for the Choctaws, while Kaitlyn Thompson added 11 points. Zariah Matthews scored 10 as the Choctaws lost their eighth straight game.
UP NEXT
Valdosta State hosts Delta State on Saturday. The women’s game tips off at 2 p.m. followed by the men’s game at 4 p.m. as VSU celebrates its 2019 Hall of Fame class.
React to this story:
