Close
Image 1 of 1
Competitors line up along the starting line for one of the Brown Relay races last year. The event returns Friday afternoon with the usual 2:30 start time.
Competitors line up along the starting line for one of the Brown Relay races last year. The event returns Friday afternoon with the usual 2:30 start time.
Photo: Robert Avery
Annual Brown Relays unfold Friday afternoon
1  /  1
Back to Gallery
Action at Allan Brown Stadium makes its annual February splash when the Brown Relays unfolds Friday.
Highlighted by the running finals that start at 6 p.m., dozens of varsity track and field athletes will descend on the stadium in hopes of starting the new season with some momentum.
Summer Creek High School’s program comes in as the defending champion in both the boys and girls action. The Lady Bulldogs coasted to a 158-87 win, while the boys had a similar experience, winning 180-125 for their victory.
It’s been rare when one school comes to town and takes both titles, so fans will see if the Bulldogs have the same level of talent that can do some repeating.
Standing in their way of a second straight title will be the usual Brown Relay opponents like Deer Park, La Porte, Dickinson, Fort Bend Elkins, a few Clear Creek ISD schools, Alief Taylor and of course the Pasadena ISD schools.
Action gets under way at 2:30 with the field events such as the various jumps, the discus and shot put and the pole vault.
Summer Creek’s Mason Schrade and teammate Dylan Bolden went 1-2 in last year’s pole vault. Both cleared 14 feet and both were juniors last year.
For the ladies, Deer Park’s Kristin Keng won the pole vault with a leap of eight feet. She’s due back to defend her title.
In last year’s high jump, Alief Taylor sophomore Esther Oboye won the girls and Summer Creek’s Anthony Etienne secured the boys’ title. Clear Lake brought a freshman by the name of Lawrence Brown who finished second so if the Falcons are back, look for Brown to pick up where he left off in 2018.
Also at 2:30, the finals to the distance medley relays will be staged as will 10 running prelims.
The winning time in the girls’ distance medley was 13:43.82, turned in by Clear Lake’s foursome. Among the four were two freshmen. Dobie was second, four seconds back.
Summer Creek captured the boys’ distance medley relay in 11:13.02. But Sam Rayburn gave the Bulldogs a run for their title by earning the time of 11:16.12.
Also slated for finals in the afternoon will be the 4 by 800 relay.
Kicking off the 6 p.m. action will be the 3200-meter run. All eyes will be on La Porte High School’s Ryan Schoppe, the reigning state champion in the event.
Schoppe, now a junior, coasted to the title with a 9:44.61, defeating Pasadena’s Alonso Corral and his 10:07.06. But Schoppe brought that time down considerably by time district, regionals and state rolled around.
Following the 3200, the 400, 800 and 1600-meter relay races will unfold as will the sprint races such as the 100 and 200 meters along with the hurdles.
ravery@hcnonline.com
