‘Let’s all pray’: Congress moves to prevent another shutdown
News | 14.02.2019
Congress faces a critical test Thursday as both chambers will vote on a giant funding deal that would temporarily end a long-running border dispute and avert another humiliating government shutdown.
The $328 billion package — which funds one-quarter of the government — is the result of roughly two weeks of frenetic talks between Democratic and Republican negotiators from both chambers.
Top GOP spending leaders insist they’ve kept close contact with the White House throughout the talks but have offered no promise that President Donald Trump would back the measure.
In a show of Congress’s desperation to keep the government funded past Friday, Sen. Chuck Grassley (R-Iowa) began Senate business Thursday morning with a prayer that Trump would sign the bill.
“Let’s all pray the president will have wisdom to sign the bill so the government doesn’t shut down,” Grassley said, just before reciting the daily Pledge of Allegiance.
Trump has indicated that he doesn’t want to see the government shuttered, saying Wednesday that “a shutdown would be a terrible thing.” But he also hinted that he’d try to go around Congress to fund his much-sought after border wall, possibly through an executive order.
Without Trump’s signature by the end of Friday, nearly a dozen government agencies, from the IRS to TSA, could lurch into another shutdown — an outcome that lawmakers say they’re in no mood to handle.
The Senate is set to vote early Thursday afternoon, with what’s expected to be broad bipartisan support.
Senate Majority Leader Mitch McConnell (R-Ky.) said on the floor Thursday that both parties should support what he called a “solid deal” that mostly avoided partisan bickering over so-called “poison pill” riders.
“We’ll be voting to deliver another down payment on the president’s commitment to securing our nation’s borders and keeping American communities safe,” McConnell said.
The Kentucky Republican vented at House Democrats for what he described as obstruction to another extension of the landmark Violence Against Women Act. The 1994 law to protect domestic violence victims is now set to temporarily expire after party leaders failed to agree on certain protections, such as people who are transgender, that Democrats sought to add.
Senate Minority Leader Chuck Schumer (D-N.Y.) described the deal as a “reasonable compromise” and expects Congress to pass it this afternoon. He also touted that the bill does not provide money for Trump’s border wall, but funds “smart border security initiatives that both parties have always supported.”
Yet Democrats blamed Republicans for refusing to concede on other outstanding issues, such as backpay for thousands of federal contractors who went unpaid for 35 days during the last shutdown.
The House will take up the measure Thursday night. Votes will take place sometime after 6:30 p.m. so that lawmakers can attend the funerals of the late Reps. John Dingell of Michigan and Walter Jones of North Carolina.
The funeral for Jones, who died Feb. 10, will take place in Greenville, N.C., and members plan to fly back to the Capitol using military aircraft immediately afterwards for votes.
A group of progressive freshmen — Reps. Alexandria Ocasio-Cortez (D-N.Y.), Ilhan Omar (D-Minn.), Ayanna Pressley (D-Mass.), and Rashida Tlaib (D-Mich.) — announced opposition to the package in a joint statement Thursday.
“The Department of Homeland Security does not deserve an increase in funding, and that is why we intend to vote no on this funding package,” they wrote.
The bill includes $1.37 billion for 55 miles of physical barrier along the southern border in the Rio Grande Valley of Texas — far less than the $5.7 billion that the White House had sought.
Republicans, too, claimed victory, saying that the deal includes “unprecedented investments” in physical barriers, law enforcement, counter-narcotics and humanitarian aid along the border.
They also touted “record” detention capacity for the Immigration and Customs Enforcement — an agency that some progressive Democrats have sought to defund altogether.
Some of Trump’s key allies say the president wants to see the text of the bill before he makes a decision.
If Trump decides to veto the bill — the first of his presidency — then House Democratic leaders would be expected to return to Washington over the weekend to attempt their first veto override.
In an unusual move, neither Democrats nor Republicans will hold a full briefing for their members on the contents of the roughly 1,100 page spending bill.
Lawmakers will vote on the text less than 24 hours after it was released, forcing Democrats to waive their 72-hour rule, in an attempt to clear the bill by Friday’s deadline.
Marianne Levine contributed to this story.
Article originally published on POLITICO Magazine
