Colin Kaepernick wanted $20 million or more to consider playing in new AAF league
The new Alliance of American Football spoke with Colin Kaepernick during its development about joining the league.
Post to Facebook
Colin Kaepernick wanted $20 million or more to consider playing in new AAF league The new Alliance of American Football spoke with Colin Kaepernick during its development about joining the league. Check out this story on USATODAY.com: https://www.usatoday.com/story/sports/nfl/2019/02/14/alliance-american-football-new-league-colin-kaepernick/2876865002/
CancelSend
A link has been sent to your friend's email address.
Posted!
A link has been posted to your Facebook feed.
Join the Nation's Conversation
To find out more about Facebook commenting please read the Conversation Guidelines and FAQs
Comments
This conversation is moderated according to USA TODAY's community rules .                                         Please read the rules before joining the discussion.
Colin Kaepernick wanted $20 million or more to consider playing in new AAF league
Associated Press Published 9:08 p.m. ET Feb. 14, 2019 | Updated 11:32 p.m. ET Feb. 14, 2019
CLOSE
CEO of the AAF, Charlie Ebersol, stops by the USA TODAY studio to discuss the start of the new football league. USA TODAY
CONNECT11 TWEET11 LinkedIn11 COMMENT11EMAIL11MORE11
A person with knowledge of the conversation tells The Associated Press that the new Alliance of American Football spoke with Colin Kaepernick during its development about joining the league.
But Kaepernick wanted $20 million or more to consider playing with the league that had its debut last weekend.
AAF co-founder Bill Polian told The Athletic that league CEO Charlie Ebersol and Kaepernick's representatives talked last summer. 
"I don't know what transpired, but he's obviously not playing," Polian told The Athletic .
Neither Kaepernick nor his representatives have acknowledged discussions with the AAF. The AAF had similar talks with other NFL free-agent players, per The Athletic.
Colin Kaepernick last played in the NFL during the 2016 season.
 (Photo11: Steven Senne, AP)
The Alliance says its mission is to provide opportunities for players not in the NFL to continue their careers, with a possibility they could entice NFL teams to sign them once the AAF season concludes at the end of April. The league also approached Tim Tebow , who said he wanted to continue pursuing his baseball career . Tebow currently is in the New York Mets' spring training camp.
Kaepernick, then with the San Francisco 49ers, helped start a wave of protests about social and racial injustice in 2016 by kneeling during the national anthem at games. He has not played the last two seasons and has brought a lawsuit against the NFL for collusion to keep him out of the league.
EXCLUDING KAEPERNICK: History will not be kind to Wisconsin lawmakers
He also fits the description for potential Alliance players, though his contract demands don't fit with the league's financial structure. After all, the AAF is entering its second weekend.
Players earn $225,000 over three years in the Alliance, but they also are free beginning in May to pursue NFL careers. Should they not catch on there, they are obligated to return to the AAF next season.
REMEMBER THEM?  AAF's starting QBs are names you will recognize
More than 80 percent of Alliance players spent some time in an NFL camp or on a roster. None is a star; the rare NFL first-round draft pick in the AAF is Birmingham running back Trent Richardson, who flamed out with the Browns and Colts, but Polian, a Pro Football Hall of Fame executive , says could be "fast approaching" stardom in the Alliance after his strong debut.
It's uncertain if Kaepernick ever will play football again, but at his asking price, the only place would be the NFL.
