Save
STUARTS DRAFT — At a blistering pace, Robert E. Lee High School came away with the Shenandoah District championship over Stuarts Draft, defeating the Cougars 90-68 on Thursday night.
The Leemen, who entered the tournament as the No. 4 seed, were ready to play at the breakneck pace that is the Cougars' signature style.
"They (Stuarts Draft) force you to play a fast pace," said RELHS head coach Terrell Mickens. "We want to play fast."
Sign up for breaking news emails & contest alerts! Click here to sign up.
The two neighboring schools split games during the regular season.
After knocking off top-seeded East Rockingham on Tuesday, the Leemen had gotten a big boost of confidence and are peaking at the right time of the season.
"We're definitely playing well now," Mickens said. "We are looking for consistency."
The reward for the Leemen now is a home game Tuesday against Strasburg of the Bull Run District in the Region 2B Tournament.
"It means a lot," Mickens said. "To play in our sanctuary and wear the home white uniforms and the tradition is big for us."
After a close first period, where Lee led 20-19, a turning point of the game came in the second quarter when Lee senior Aarian Brown scored on a basket after Draft sharpshooter Jared Rosen had tied the game with a long three-pointer.
From there, the Leemen never surrendered the lead.
In the third period, Lee extended its lead with solid three-point shooting (the Draft trademark) and more defensive intensity.
In fact, Lee doubled its eight-point halftime lead to 16 (69-53) by the end of the quarter.
The Leemen continued on the front foot, preventing the high-scoring Cougars from mounting a comeback in the fourth quarter.
"We couldn't get a lead and ended up chasing all night," said SDHS head coach Mike Gale.  The Cougars now will travel to either Falls Church or Woodstock to play the winner of the Mason vs. Central matchup.
"The good news is that we aren't done," Gale said. "We will hit the road and regroup."
Aarian Brown led the Leemen (15-9) with 20 points, while junior Javon Battle, junior Ethan Vest and senior Treyvn West scored 16, 15 and 11 points for Lee.
For the Cougars (18-7), Freddie Watkins led the way with 11 points as 13 Draft players hit the scoresheet.
Stuarts Draft plays next at Central on Tuesday.
The All-District teams were announced after the presentation of the runner-up and championship trophies.
Battle and Stuarts Draft junior Mark Rodgers were first-team selections and were joined by Shenandoah District Player of the Year Dalton Jefferson of East Rockingham, East Rock freshman Tyler Nickel, Wilson Memorial junior Matt Poole, junior Grant Painter of Riverheads and Page County juniors Trevor Williams and Chase Combs.
On the second team were Rosen of Draft, Lee's Aarian Brown, junior Tyce McNair of East Rockingham, Buffalo Gap junior Weston Smith. Wilson junior Gabe LaGrua, Luray senior Brayden Burrill, senior Drew Bond of Riverheads and East Rock senior Collin Wigley. East Rockingham head coach Carey Keyes was selected district Coach of the Year.
