Comments
3
1of3TOPSHOT - (FILES) In this file photo taken on November 18, 2018, would-be migrants to the United states from Honduras peer through the fence demarcating the US-Mexico border in San Ysidro, California. (Photo by Sandy Huffaker / AFP)SANDY HUFFAKER/AFP/Getty ImagesPhoto: SANDY HUFFAKER, Contributor / AFP/Getty Images
2of3The US Capitol is seen ahead of a partial government shutdown in Washington, DC. The shutdown ended on Friday, but could resume after three weeks unless Congress and President Trump resolve border enforcement issues. (Photo by SAUL LOEB / AFP)SAUL LOEB/AFP/Getty ImagesPhoto: SAUL LOEB, Contributor / AFP/Getty Images
3of3TOPSHOT - A sign is displayed on a government building that was closed because of a US government shutdown in Washington, DC, on December 22, 2018. - (Photo by ANDREW CABALLERO-REYNOLDS / AFP)ANDREW CABALLERO-REYNOLDS/AFP/Getty ImagesPhoto: ANDREW CABALLERO-REYNOLDS, Contributor / AFP/Getty Images
One man has been waiting two years to seek asylum for his wife and children facing danger back home. A Pakistani woman has been trying for a decade to become a U.S. citizen and was expecting a final ruling from a judge in Houston after Christmas.
Instead knowledge of her fate was set back — again.
“She kept crying to me, ‘When is it going to be over?’ ” said her attorney, Gordon Quan. “They have a burden on their back and their futures are unsettled.”
The nation’s already backlogged immigration courts lurched back to life Monday following a record government shutdown in the name of border security. But the impact on the courts— an often publicly forgotten arm of immigration enforcement —will likely be felt for years.
With a record 827,000 pending cases, including more than 51,000 in Houston, the 35-day long shutdown pushed an already overburdened system closer to the precipice. More than 80,000 hearings were canceled, according to the Transactional Records Access Clearinghouse, a research center at Syracuse University.
Texas had the third-most postponed hearings in the country after California and New York. Across the nation Monday, judges rescheduled some cases to 2023 even as government attorneys arrived to work with no prepared files, causing further delays.
Immigrants who should have been quickly deported were granted an unwarranted reprieve, while those with credible asylum claims or other legitimate reasons to remain now must wait even longer.
“The administration’s shutdown of the government could not have come at a worse time,” said Elizabeth Mendoza, a Houston immigration attorney. “The courts are understaffed, dealing with a massive docket and almost weekly policy changes, and the shutdown has made things even worse.”
The Executive Office for Immigration Review, an arm of the Department of Justice overseeing immigration courts, has been understaffed for years, with about 385 judges across the nation, including about 15 in the Houston area, struggling to tackle an ever-worsening caseload. An average immigration judge could oversee more than 2,000 cases.
Under President Donald Trump’s administration, the agency also made it more difficult to qualify for asylum and other forms of immigration relief. It has imposed controversial quotas mandating judges close about 700 cases a year to receive a “satisfactory” rating.
“We are looking to management to see what is going to happen to these quotas given the 35 day-delay,” said Amiena Khan, vice president of the National Association of Immigration Judges and a judge in New York.
She said the union was also seeking guidance about whether cases missed during the shutdown should be pushed to the end of the line, meaning those immigrants could be set back years.
“We have a long way to go and a lot of work to do to catch up,” Khan said.
Some courts in Indiana, Michigan, Georgia and Colorado remained closed this week because of bad weather. In others, including in San Antonio, interpreters had not been arranged.
In Houston’s downtown immigration court, immigrants waited hours only to be told to return months or even years from now. Judge Clarease Rankin Yates presided calmly over the chaos.
“I came in yesterday to prepare these files but we’re going to have to continue these cases,” she said. “The government doesn’t have any files. We just got back after three weeks of furlough.”
Rickey Watson, a Houston immigration attorney, said he called the court early Monday, but a recorded message wrongly said it was still closed. So Watson told his client, a 17-year-old girl from El Salvador, to go to school and said her father could go to work.
The government attorney suggested the girl should receive a deportation order for having missed the proceeding, but the judge agreed to postpone her hearing until July.
“It’s a double-edged sword,” said Baldo Garza, another immigration attorney. “On one hand, there are delays if your cases have merit but if not, it helps stretch things out.”
He said court staff must dig through boxes of required documents attorneys mailed in during the furlough. Until they caught up, he was bringing copies of paperwork he had already submitted.
A sense of confusion prevailed.
Garza was waiting for one client who realized that day he had a court hearing, although the attorney hadn’t received such a notification. Another client who crossed illegally into the United States in 2013 and was seeking asylum had his hearing reset to 2023.
“Everybody has been calling, ‘What are we doing, what’s going on?’” Garza said. “Whatever backlog there already was is just now going to be that much bigger.”
Attorney Ruby Powers said about five of her clients had their cases canceled during the shutdown. She was concerned about the trickle-down effect.
“It’s extremely ironic and counterintuitive by the administration,” she said. “Deportations are being delayed because of this, but also many people’s lives are on hold.”
She said she is most worried about the man seeking asylum for his imperiled family abroad.
“His case is dependent on the approval to bring his wife and child to the United States,” she said. “They’re in a precarious balance waiting for the results and they’re in potential danger.”
Powers had filed to fast-forward his hearing to later this year, though now she doubted that would materialize.
“There’s going to be a lot of shuffling around,” she said. “We’re thinking we’re going to have to help manage his expectations.”
Noel Suniga, an attorney with the firm Gonzalez Olivieri, said the worst was knowing a government shutdown could happen again soon. Trump has threatened a second if he doesn’t receive funding for a border fence by Feb. 15.
“It’s kind of groundhogs popping their heads out of the sand and maybe we’ll be back down there again,” Suniga said.
lomi.kriel@chron.com
