Lawmakers finalize spending deal details to avoid shutdown
By DAVID BROWN ( )
02/14/2019 10:00 AM EST
With Wesley Morgan, Connor O’Brien and Jacqueline Klimas
Editor's Note: This edition of Morning Defense is published weekdays at 10 a.m. POLITICO Pro Defense subscribers hold exclusive early access to the newsletter each morning at 5:30 a.m. To learn more about POLITICO Pro's comprehensive policy intelligence coverage, policy tools and services, click here .
QUICK FIX
Story Continued Below
— Negotiators put the finishing touches on a spending bill Wednesday night to avoid a shutdown. President Donald Trump still hasn’t committed to signing it, but lawmakers have faith he will.
— The House passes a bill to halt U.S. military support to Saudis in their war against Houthi rebels in Yemen. Next it heads to the Senate.
— In Brussels, NATO defense ministers are sizing up Acting Defense Secretary Pat Shanahan as he makes his international debut this week.
HAPPY THURSDAY AND WELCOME TO MORNING DEFENSE, where we're always on the lookout for tips, pitches and feedback. Email us at dbrown@politico.com , and follow on Twitter @dave_brown24 , @morningdefense and @politicopro .
Driving the Day
DEAL TEED UP: “Congressional negotiators finalized a massive funding package just before midnight Wednesday, confident they'll have enough support to deliver it to President Trump's desk in time to avert a shutdown,” write POLITICO’s John Bresnahan, Sarah Ferris and Melanie Zanona.
“The Senate plans to move quickly to approve the funding accord Thursday, sending it to the House, where it's also expected to have large bipartisan backing. The bill will then be sent to Trump, where even top lawmakers are still holding their breath that he'll sign it and avert a second shutdown.”
Trump is still mum on whether he’ll sign it, POLITICO’s Caitlin Oprysko reports . He also “hinted he would move to unilaterally secure funding for his long-promised border wall, telling reporters that ‘regardless of what I do … I have a lot of options.’”
The bill text is here . POLITICO’s Jennifer Scholtes and Caitlin Emma also have a detailed breakdown here .
ON THE HILL
YEMEN RESOLUTION: “The House on Wednesday passed a bill to halt U.S. involvement in Yemen’s civil war, in yet another bipartisan rebuke of President Donald Trump’s foreign policy,” POLITICO’s Andrew Desiderio writes .
“The legislation now heads to the Senate, where proponents expect it to narrowly pass in the coming weeks before arriving on Trump’s desk, setting up the first veto of his presidency.”
Making history: “If it clears the Senate, it will be the first time in history that both chambers of Congress passed a War Powers resolution to scale back a president’s authority on the use of military force.”
Meanwhile, Al-Monitor reports that the administration won’t be certifying to Congress “that the Saudi-led force fighting in Yemen is attempting to reduce civilian deaths in the conflict ... a move that would bar the Pentagon from resuming refueling to the coalition.”
AI CAUCUS: Sens. Martin Heinrich (D-N.M.) and Rob Portman (R-Ohio) are teaming up to launch a bipartisan artificial intelligence caucus aimed at developing the technology while maintaining safety and privacy standards. The move comes as Trump signed an executive order aimed at boosting the government's role in developing AI technology as well as the release of the Pentagon's AI strategy.
PENTAGON
THE HIDDEN STRATEGY: “Gen. Joe Dunford, the outgoing chairman of the Joint Chiefs of Staff, has finished his new edition of the National Military strategy — but currently has no plans to roll out a public version of the traditionally unclassified document,” Defense News writes .
WILSON MUM ON SECDEF RUMORS: POLITICO’s Anna Palmer sat down with Air Force Secretary Heather Wilson in the latest edition of the Women Rule podcast .
In the interview, Wilson declined to weigh in on whether she could be nominated to be the next secretary of defense.
“I serve here at the pleasure of the president and with the confirmation of the Senate, and I think that’s probably where I am,” Wilson said.
Subscribe to Women Rule on Apple Podcasts here . Subscribe via Spotify here .
NATO
EYES ON SHANAHAN: “U.S. allies will use the opportunity of Patrick Shanahan’s first NATO ministers meeting this week to see whether the acting defense secretary will be as supportive of the military alliance as his predecessor was, defense officials and experts said,” via Reuters.
Former Defense Secretary Jim “Mattis was one of the few remaining senior Trump administration officials we could rely on, so there’s a great sense of loss,” a European diplomat said.
“Frankly, Shanahan is an unknown to us.”
Also at NATO, ministers prepare for life after INF, which means Russia with a lot more missiles, Military Times reports .
BUILDUP IN POLAND? “The United States is in talks with Poland over Warsaw’s request for more American troops on its soil, but no decision has been taken so far, U.S. officials said on Wednesday, as Washington weighs potential military threats from Russia,” Reuters also writes .
MILITARY EXPANSION: “With U.S. President Donald Trump raising previously unthinkable doubts about America’s willingness to defend its traditional NATO allies, some European leaders, officials and military experts insist the Continent must do more to defend itself,” per POLITICO’s David Herszenhorn.
WAR REPORT
TRUMP’S PREMATURE VICTORY LAP: Trump last week predicted 100 percent of ISIS territory would be liberated by this week, but experts and military leaders say that doesn’t match the picture on the ground, our colleague Wesley Morgan reports .
“But official reporting from the Pentagon, intelligence agencies, and international bodies reveal a more complicated picture that Trump paints — or than the 100 percent figure suggests. Testimony from top military and intelligence officials last week highlights that disparity, as do several recent reports from the U.S. government and the United Nations.”
In Syria, more than 200 ISIS fighters surrendered to U.S.-backed forces, per The Associated Press.
INDUSTRY INTEL
AIA PRIORITIES: Eric Fanning, president and CEO of the Aerospace Industries Association, rolls out the group’s priorities for the coming year today.
Sneak preview: Fanning is expected to call for:
— “A budget deal that spans the final years of the Budget Control Act (2020-2021);
— “More government partnership with industry on smart regulations and use of industry-developed standards where that makes sense;
— “Restoring the Export-Import Bank to full operations by confirming the Chair and Directors to the Board and reauthorizing the Bank’s operations before October.”
The group is also celebrating its centennial (it was called the Aeronautical Chamber of Commerce when it was formed) with a new theme and logo. See a video presentation here .
SPACEX PROTEST: “SpaceX is protesting NASA's decision to award United Launch Alliance a contract to launch its Lucy mission, which will explore the Trojan Asteroids,” our colleague Jacqueline Klimas writes .
THE WHITE HOUSE
TWEETIN’ BOLTON: POLITICO’s Eliana Johnson writes about how national security adviser John Bolton is adopting the president’s method of shaping the message via Twitter.
“Trump's third national security adviser is using Twitter far more often, and more colorfully, than any of his predecessors — making policy pronouncements and lambasting perceived bad guys. His targets range widely, from the Cuban government to Vladimir Putin's Russia to the ‘failing’ New York Times.”
AMERICAS
DEMS OPPOSE MILITARY OPTION: “Democratic lawmakers on Wednesday said Congress would oppose U.S. military intervention in Venezuela and challenged the credibility of President Donald Trump’s special envoy, Elliott Abrams, over his past embrace of American covert action,” Reuters reports .
Tense video: Watch this exchange between Rep. Ilhan Omar (D-Minn.) and Abrams over the Iran-Contra affair and whether the U.S. will look away when other countries commit genocide.
AIR FORCE
FORMER OFFICER CHARGED WITH SPYING: “The Justice Department on Wednesday unsealed an indictment against a former Air Force counterintelligence officer on espionage charges for allegedly revealing classified information to Iran,” POLITICO’s Katie Galioto reports .
SPEED READ
— Rep. Adam Kinzinger deployed to U.S.-Mexico border: POLITICO
— U.S. negotiators to meet Taliban delegation in Islamabad on Feb. 18: Taliban spokesman: Reuters
— How killer robots overran the UN: POLITICO Europe
— Europe must avoid another East-West missile race: POLITICO Europe
— U.S. revives secret program to sabotage Iranian missiles and rockets: The New York Times
— No, the Pentagon is not working on killer robots — yet: Foreign Policy
— Pompeo says ‘confronting Iran’ key to Mideast peace: The Associated Press
— Netanyahu Twitter account takes down ‘war with Iran’ tweet, corrects to ‘combating Iran’: Mediaite
— Navy keeps publicly scapegoating former USS Fitzgerald CO for deadly 2017 collision, his attorneys argue: Task & Purpose
« View Archives
About The Author : David Brown
David Brown is a Policy Advisor for the Economic Program at Third Way, a moderate Washington, D.C. think tank.
