FacebookEmail Twitter Google+ LinkedIn Pinterest
Donald Trump says he's 'not happy' about border security deal but doesn't want another shutdown
Congress must approve the new deal by midnight Friday to keep the government running and avoid another shutdown.
Post to Facebook
Donald Trump says he's 'not happy' about border security deal but doesn't want another shutdown Congress must approve the new deal by midnight Friday to keep the government running and avoid another shutdown. Check out this story on USATODAY.com: https://www.usatoday.com/story/news/politics/2019/02/12/government-shutdown-mcconnell-says-congress-could-vote-soon-deal/2846552002/
CancelSend
A link has been sent to your friend's email address.
Posted!
A link has been posted to your Facebook feed.
Join the Nation's Conversation
To find out more about Facebook commenting please read the Conversation Guidelines and FAQs
This conversation is moderated according to USA TODAY's community rules .                                         Please read the rules before joining the discussion.
Donald Trump says he's 'not happy' about border security deal but doesn't want another shutdown
Michael Collins, Eliza Collins and David Jackson , USA TODAY Published 11:14 a.m. ET Feb. 12, 2019 | Updated 6:58 p.m. ET Feb. 12, 2019
CLOSE
President Trump is proposing a $4 trillion-plus budget that projects a $1 trillion or so federal deficit.  AP's Economic Reporter Josh Boak says the plan is like a 'Christmas list, a wish list' that amounts amounts to a 'massive bet'. (Feb. 12) AP
CONNECT TWEET LINKEDIN COMMENTEMAILMORE
WASHINGTON – President Donald Trump slammed a tentative border security agreement reached by congressional negotiators looking to avert another government shutdown, but he did not say Tuesday whether he would sign the legislation if it reached his desk.
Though he expressed dissatisfaction with the deal reached Monday night by a bipartisan group of budget negotiators, Trump said he did not want to see a government shutdown.
"Am I happy at first glance? I just got to see it," Trump said during a Cabinet meeting at the White House. "The answer is no, I'm not. I'm not happy."
But, he said,  "I don’t think you're going to see a shutdown. I wouldn’t want to go to it, no."
CLOSE
President Donald Trump is ripping a proposal that some Democrats have embraced to curb global warming. Trump, at a rally in El Paso, Texas, claimed that the "Green New Deal" would shut down American energy and air travel. (Feb. 12) AP
On Capitol Hill, Senate Majority Leader Mitch McConnell, R-Ky., said the Senate could vote “in short order” on the tentative proposal and urged Trump to sign it.
Though the agreement doesn't have everything Trump wants, "I think he's got a pretty good deal here," McConnell said. "I hope he'll decide to sign it."
Senate Minority Leader Charles Schumer, D-N.Y., said the agreement represents “a path forward for our country” and would help avoid “another round of fraught negotiations” as lawmakers rush to beat Friday's fast-approaching deadline.
"Please, Mr. President," Schumer said. "Sign it, and don’t cause a shutdown.”
