FacebookEmail Twitter Google+ LinkedIn Pinterest
Border security bill limits shackling of pregnant women, puts restrictions on Trump's wall
Congress is not only giving Trump money for a wall than he wanted, it's also placing new restrictions on immigration enforcement practices.
Post to Facebook
Border security bill limits shackling of pregnant women, puts restrictions on Trump's wall Congress is not only giving Trump money for a wall than he wanted, it's also placing new restrictions on immigration enforcement practices. Check out this story on USATODAY.com: https://www.usatoday.com/story/news/politics/2019/02/14/donald-trump-border-security-bill-limits-wall-immigration-practices/2871733002/
CancelSend
A link has been sent to your friend's email address.
Posted!
A link has been posted to your Facebook feed.
Join the Nation's Conversation
To find out more about Facebook commenting please read the Conversation Guidelines and FAQs
This conversation is moderated according to USA TODAY's community rules .                                         Please read the rules before joining the discussion.
Border security bill limits shackling of pregnant women, puts restrictions on Trump's wall
John Fritze , USA TODAY Published 3:59 p.m. ET Feb. 14, 2019 | Updated 4:12 p.m. ET Feb. 14, 2019
CLOSE
President Donald Trump says the wall he envisions in some places along the southern border would be harder to scale than Mount Everest. He says the wall is "very, very on its way" and says people will have to be very fit to scale it. (Feb. 13) AP
CONNECT11 TWEET11 LinkedIn11 COMMENT11EMAIL11MORE11
WASHINGTON – Congress is not only giving President Donald Trump far less border wall money than he requested in the spending package lawmakers are set to approve Thursday, it is also placing new restrictions on immigration enforcement practices.
Tucked into the massive border security bill are new restrictions on shackling pregnant women in federal custody, reporting requirements for the Department of Homeland Security and limitations that could slow the construction of border barriers.
Some of the provisions were included in earlier drafts of the legislation. 
"There have been so many stories and cases showing the needs at these facilities, I wasn't surprised to see them in there," said Kerri Talbot, director of federal advocacy for the Immigration Hub, an immigrant advocacy group. 
Trump said Thursday he's going to sign the legislation, which includes $1.375 billion for 55 miles of border barrier – much less than the $5.7 billion Trump had demanded.
Here are some of the immigration enforcement restrictions included in the bill: 
• The measure prohibits the Department of Homeland Security from placing restraints on pregnant women in detention facilities, except in circumstances where the woman is deemed to be a flight risk or poses an "immediate and serious threat." The prohibition follows a report last summer by BuzzFeed that quoted pregnant women saying there were denied care and were shackled around the stomach while in custody . 
Congress approved similar prohibitions late last year in a bipartisan criminal justice reform bill called the First Step Act . But those restrictions applied to women held in federal prisons run by the Department of Justice.   
• Lawmakers included new restrictions on how Trump can use federal money to erect barriers along the border. One provision requires the federal government to get buy in from cities along the wall route over the design of the barrier. If the cities and the Department of Homeland Security are unable to reach an agreement on the design, the federal government would have to hold off on construction until the end of September. 
Another provision would require the Department of Homeland Security to present an "expenditure plan" on U.S. Customs and Border Protection construction plans before any money could be spent on those projects. 
• The measure prohibits the Department of Homeland Security from blocking a member of Congress from entering a DHS facility used to house minors.  Sen. Jeff Merkley, D-Ore., drew national headlines when was denied entry into a former Walmart that was being used to house immigrant children. 
• The Department of Homeland Security would be prohibited from detaining or deporting the sponsors of children who crossed the border without adults. Those children are sometimes placed with family members who are not in the country legally. The prohibition follows reports that the Office of Refugee Resettlement, part of the Department of Health and Human Services, was sharing data with the Department of Homeland Security when it placed an unaccompanied immigrant child with family.   
• Within three months of the law taking effect, U.S. Immigration and Customs Enforcement will be required to produce a public report on how many immigrants it is holding in detention, how many of them may be eligible for asylum and the average length of those detentions. 
President Donald Trump gestures while delivering remarks at the Major County Sheriffs and Major Cities Chiefs Association Joint Conference in Washington, D.C., on Feb. 13, 2019.
 (Photo11: Michael Reynolds, epa-efe)
