north america
Trump to declare ‘national emergency’ to fund his border wall
Donald Trump will declare a national emergency to fund his border wall - a move that House Speaker Nancy Pelosi says should be met with “unease and dismay”.
Staff reporter and AP
Border Wall: Donald Trump declares a national emergency0:57
President Trump has issued a national emergency declaration.
February 14th 2019
/display/newscorpaustralia.com/Web/NewsNetwork/Network News/World/
US President Donald Trump. Picture: AFPSource:AFP
US President Donald Trump will issue a national emergency declaration to fund his contested border wall but House Speaker Nancy Pelosi says there’s no crisis at the border with Mexico that would require such a drastic move.
Top Senate Republican Mitch McConnell told colleagues that he spoke with the president by phone, who indicated he was prepared to sign a spending bill that would avert a government shutdown, and also he would issue the national emergency declaration order at the same time.
House Speaker Nancy Pelosi says Trump’s plan to declare a national emergency order to fund his border wall should be met with “unease and dismay”. Picture: APSource:AFP
The White House later confirmed this is the case.
Declaring such an emergency, a rare step, would free Trump to seek to redirect federal funds from elsewhere to help pay for a wall along the US-Mexico border, although the move is expected to be challenged in court.
Ms Pelosi has not indicated whether House Democrats planned to legally challenge the president.
But she said if Mr Trump invokes an emergency declaration it should be met with “great unease and dismay” as an overreach of executive authority.
MORE: FBI discussed removing Trump
President Donald Trump will declare a national emergency to fund his border wall. Picture: APSource:AP
Mr McConnell said the Senate will soon vote on the bill that’s needed to avoid a partial federal shutdown.
The House is also expected to vote on the bill later today.
White House Press Secretary said Mr Trump would take “other executive action” including the national emergency as he sought to keep his border wall pledge.
White House Press Secretary Sarah Sanders confirmed the president’s plans. Picture: APSource:AP
The President is once again delivering on his promise to build the wall, protect the border, and secure our great country,” Ms Sanders said.
The compromise measure keeps departments running through the fiscal year but without the $US5.7 billion Trump wanted for the border wall with Mexico.
Reviewing the funding bill with my team at the @WhiteHouse !
— Donald J. Trump (@realDonaldTrump) February 14, 2019
I want to thank all Republicans for the work you have done in dealing with the Radical Left on Border Security. Not an easy task, but the Wall is being built and will be a great achievement and contributor toward life and safety within our Country!
— Donald J. Trump (@realDonaldTrump) February 13, 2019
The Democratic-controlled House was poised to pass the sweeping measure and the Republican-led Senate was expected to approve as well.
Mr Trump’s assent would end a raucous legislative saga that commenced before Christmas and saw him force a record 35-day partial federal shutdown.
Earlier the president tweeted: “Reviewing the funding bill with my team at the (at) WhiteHouse!”
Senate Majority Leader Mitch McConnell confirmed Trump was prepared to sign the bill. Picture: APSource:AP
Republican Senator Chuck Grassley said earlier he was praying that Mr Trump would sign the border security deal into law to prevent a government shutdown.
Mr Grassley was presiding over the Senate opening when after the Morning Prayer, he added: “Let’s all pray that the president will have wisdom to sign the bill so the government doesn’t shut down.”
Mr McConnell urged senators to approve it as “a compromise that no side will view as a perfect deal.”
More to come.
