FacebookEmail Twitter Google+ LinkedIn Pinterest
In government shutdown aftermath, federal workers still hurting, survey finds
In the aftermath of the government shutdown, a survey from Prudential Financial underscores how vital even one missed paycheck is for many Americans.
Post to Facebook
In government shutdown aftermath, federal workers still hurting, survey finds In the aftermath of the government shutdown, a survey from Prudential Financial underscores how vital even one missed paycheck is for many Americans. Check out this story on USATODAY.com: https://www.usatoday.com/story/money/2019/02/12/government-shutdown-looms-federal-workers-still-hurting-financially/2840443002/
CancelSend
A link has been sent to your friend's email address.
Posted!
A link has been posted to your Facebook feed.
Join the Nation's Conversation
To find out more about Facebook commenting please read the Conversation Guidelines and FAQs
This conversation is moderated according to USA TODAY's community rules .                                         Please read the rules before joining the discussion.
In government shutdown aftermath, federal workers still hurting, survey finds
Janna Herron , USA TODAY Published 6:01 a.m. ET Feb. 12, 2019 | Updated 11:35 a.m. ET Feb. 14, 2019
CLOSE
Transportation Security Agency workers say they're relieved they will soon be getting their missed paychecks now that the government shutdown is over. But they also say they're worried that another shutdown could occur in a few weeks. (Jan. 25) AP
CONNECT TWEET LINKEDIN COMMENTEMAILMORE
During the nation's longest federal shutdown, Joel Rodriguez, a furloughed auditor at NASA, borrowed money from his parents and took out a personal loan to pay bills. He drove for Uber, Lyft, Postmates and Instacart, earning $2,000 during the 35-day stretch.
“That’s what I did to survive,” said Rodriguez, who is married with two small children.
He was largely able to keep up with his obligations. His only hiccup was sending in his February mortgage payment and car payment seven days late.
Rodriguez’s financial gymnastics were common among federal workers during the shutdown, according to a new survey of 350 federal employees, contractors and their spouses provided exclusively to USA TODAY by Prudential Financial. The survey underscored how vital even one to two missed paychecks are for many Americans, especially as federal workers brace for the possibility of another shutdown this week.
Joel Rodriguez and his wife, Marlin Benitez, pose in Washington, D.C.
 (Photo: Joel Rodriguez)
“The partial government shutdown really put a spotlight on the fact that most Americans can’t weather even a brief disruption in their income,” said Jamie Kalamarides, president of group insurance at Prudential Financial. “It’s a wake-up call to the general population.”
Food banks, skipping health expenses
During the shutdown, federal workers went to great lengths to deal with their cash flow shortfall. Almost a quarter reduced or eliminated spending on health or medical expenses for themselves or their family. One in four visited a food bank.
Refund worries?  What will your tax refund be? So far, they're smaller by an average of $170
Forty-two percent took on more debt to pay for day-to-day expenses and bills. Two in five turned to family or friends, while one in five borrowed from a bank or credit union.
Rodriguez borrowed $2,000 from his parents and took out a $3,000 loan from his credit union. He has since paid both back with his first two retroactive paychecks.
“I only had the loan open a week,” he said.
At Navy Federal Credit Union, nearly 20,000 of its members signed up to get zero-percent loans based on their most recent direct deposit, according to a company spokesman.
Family money: Precollege schooling: How to pay for pre-K through prep school
Just over a quarter of federal workers surveyed tapped their retirement accounts – either taking a loan or outright distribution. One in 10 borrowed from an alternative lender, while 9 percent turned to crowdfunding.
GoFundMe saw about 4,000 campaigns that raised nearly $2 million to support those affected by the shutdown, a company spokeswoman said.
Lasting consequences
Despite their efforts, almost half of federal workers fell behind on bills. More than a quarter missed a mortgage or rent payment; 13 percent fell behind on student loans; and 10 percent skipped a tuition payment, Prudential found.
 (Photo: Getty Images)
Of those who had emergency savings, 62 percent said they depleted all or most of those rainy-day funds. Almost a third spent less than half of it.
“The unfortunate thing is the people who are recovering from the shutdown are in a very delicate place right now. They’re just at the point of getting back on their feet,” said Bruce McClary, spokesman for the National Foundation for Credit Counseling.  “With another deadline coming up, the best things people can do is start reviewing their options if we do go into another shutdown.”
Preparing for the next one
As lawmakers try to work out a border security deal by Friday to avert another shutdown, federal workers are re-committing to saving to help get through the next unexpected event. Just over half plan to add more money to their savings, while one in 10 who don’t have any emergency fund plan to start one.
“I do Lyft and Uber in the early mornings and at night to prepare for another shutdown.”
Joel Rodriguez, a federal worker
McClary said that many of the banks and credit unions he’s talked to also plan to offer similar support as last time if the government shuts down again, including low to no-interest short-term loans.
Rodriguez is also preparing. “I do Lyft and Uber in the early mornings and at night to prepare for another shutdown,” in addition to his day job, he said. “I told my parents to take the money I owed them because I may need it later.”
CLOSE
In Denver, furloughed federal workers discussed the impact of the shutdown with Rep. Diane DeGette. President Donald Trump agreed to a deal Friday to reopen the government for three weeks. (Jan 25) AP
 
