 
Who can take part?
To register for the weekly free bet, login with your new or existing Paddy Power account and join the promotion.
Applies to online, mobile, phone and text bets only. Does not apply in retail shops.
 
How & when can I qualify?
Place 5 bets of £10 or more on Sports and Virtuals and you will be credited with a free £10 bet the Monday after your 5th qualifying bet.
Your qualifying bets can be placed on any sport and will qualify as long as the odds, or combined odds, are 1/2 (1.5) or greater.
Each bet must be settled to qualify. 
Applies to bets placed on all Sports and Virtuals only. Gaming bets do not qualify for this promotion.
Your bet count resets to zero at 00:01 the Monday after your 5th qualifying bet. This allows you to start again for this promotion. 
 
Max free bet is £10 per customer per week.
 
When will I get my prize?
All free bets will be credited the next Monday after your 5th qualifying bet.
Free bets will be credited by 12pm.
Free bets will be available to use on any market until 23.59.59 on the following Sunday after being credited.
 
What else do I need to know?
If you don’t have any settled bets for 30 days on your account, your bet count will drop to zero.     
Cashed out and partially cashed out bets do not apply for this offer.
Contingency and void bets will not qualify for this offer.
Multiple bets on the same selection do not count (for example if you place x5 bets of £10 on Manchester United to beat Arsenal only x1 of these bets will count towards the offer).
Stakes from free bets cannot be used to qualify for further free bets (ie, qualifying bets must be made using your own funds).
Does not apply to Tote, Lotto or pools bets.
Free bet stake not returned in winnings.
 
Other boring but essential stuff:
We reserve the right to exclude players who participate in the promotion with multiple accounts.
If you abuse the promotion, for example, if we suspect that you are using an abusive strategy to complete the wagering requirement, or you are able to guarantee profits regardless of the outcome of sporting events (whether individually or as part of a group), we reserve the right to exclude you from the promotion and to withhold the prize.
We reserve the right to withdraw the availability of this offer to any player or group of players, or to modify the terms and conditions of this promotion at any time.  This will not impact any players who have already started wagering under the promotion.  
Paddy Power betting rules apply, see here .
PPB Counterparty Services Limited, Triq il-Kappillan Mifsud, St. Venera, SVR 1851, MALTA, is licensed and regulated by the Malta Gaming Authority . Licence Number: MGA/CL2/294/2006 12 March 2013, and for customers in the UK, licensed and regulated by the Gambling Commission . Games are provided by PPB Entertainment Limited, Triq il-Kappillan Mifsud, St. Venera, SVR 1851, MALTA, is licensed and regulated by the Malta Gaming Authority . Licence Number: MGA/CL1/185/2004 1st July 2015, and for customers in the UK, licensed and regulated by the Gambling Commission . Casino, Bingo and Poker are provided by Paddy Power Services Limited, company Number 1894, is licensed and regulated by the Alderney Gambling Control Commission , and for customers in the UK, licensed and regulated by the Gambling Commission . Gambling can be addictive, please play responsibly .
