Share on Facebook Share on Twitter
The deal reached by congressional negotiators to fund the government past Friday may not make President Donald Trump happy, but a POLITICO/Morning Consult poll suggests another government shutdown would make voters even more upset.
The poll, conducted before leaders of the conference committee reached an agreement on Monday, shows little appetite among voters for another shutdown. It comes three weeks after the longest-ever lapse in appropriations ended. Only 33 percent of respondents support another shutdown over Trump’s demand for a wall along the U.S.-Mexican border. Roughly 6 in 10 voters oppose another shutdown.
Story Continued Below
Members of Congress announced a deal on Monday that would fund the Department of Homeland Security and other federal agencies through the end of September. The agreement does not provide any money for a concrete wall along the border and far less for fencing than Trump had requested.
Get the latest on employment and immigration, every weekday morning — in your inbox.
Email
Sign Up
By signing up you agree to receive email newsletters or alerts from POLITICO. You can unsubscribe at any time.
The president panned the deal Tuesday, but said he did not expect to force another government shutdown by rejecting any funding bill that passes Congress.
“I don’t think you are going to see a shutdown,” Trump said. “I wouldn’t want to go to it. If you did have it, it’s the Democrats’ fault.”
The POLITICO/Morning Consult poll suggests Trump and Republicans would shoulder more blame for another shutdown than Democrats. A combined 52 percent of voters would blame Trump or Republicans in Congress if the government shuts down again, according to the poll — greater than the 37 percent who would blame congressional Democrats.
Tyler Sinclair, Morning Consult’s vice president, said that’s closer than in polls before the shutdown that began late last year and stretched into January.
“Although voters would hold President Trump responsible for a second shutdown, there’s an uptick in voters who would blame congressional Democrats,” Sinclair said. “Notably, 37 percent of voters would blame congressional Democrats for a government shutdown, compared to 31 percent who said the same before the first shutdown.”
