Trump and Beto O'Rourke speak at dueling rallies in Texas – as it happened
‘We’re building the wall anyway,’ Trump said of the deal reached in Congress late Monday
Vivian Ho in Oakland (now) and Ben Jacobs in Washington (earlier)
Mon 11 Feb 2019 22.56 EST
First published on Mon 11 Feb 2019 09.02 EST
Evening summary
Thanks for sticking with us through another eventful day.
Democratic and Republican leaders reached an agreement to avoid another partial government shutdown, just days before the 15 February deadline. The deal would allocate far less money than what Trump asked for when it came to his border wall, but it would fund 55 miles of new fencing.
President Trump and former Congressman Beto O’Rourke both held rallies in El Paso, Texas. Trump’s speech felt more like a preview for the 2020 race than a push for a border wall, while O’Rourke stayed on message in declaring that “walls do not make us safer.”
22:49
Deal to avoid shutdown includes 55 miles of new fencing
The Guardian’s Tom McCarthy has the details on the agreement reached by Democratic and Republican leaders late Monday to avoid another government shutdown:
The agreement would allocate far less money for Trump’s border wall than the White House’s $5.7bn wish list, settling for a figure of nearly $1.4bn, according to congressional aides. The funding measure is through the fiscal year, which ends 30 September.
The agreement means 55 miles of new fencing — constructed through existing designs such as metal slats instead of a concrete wall — but far less than the 215 miles the White House demanded in December. The fencing would be built in the Rio Grande Valley in Texas.
At a rally in El Paso, Texas, on Monday Trump said he had been informed about the committee’s progress. “Just so you know, we’re building the wall anyway”, he added.
Trump's expected 'border wall' speech feels like 2016 election rally
Edwin Delgado
At what was expected to be a border wall-focused event, President Trump energized his base over much more than just immigration.
He took jabs at all the usual crowdpleasers at a Trump rally, drawing unified boos against the media, the Democrats , abortion, and, yes, Hillary Clinton.
Andrew Lawrence (@ndrew_lawrence)
"Lock her up" chant breaks out a Trump rally in February 2019, 27 months after the election pic.twitter.com/BuMEIg7vTG
“The Democratic Party has never been so far out of the mainstream,
he said. “They’ve become the party of socialism, late-term abortions, open borders, and crime.”
As in many of his speeches, this one was filled with heavy boasting and factual inaccuracies. Trump made a point several times throughout his speech to pile on former Congressman Beto O’Rourke, who was holding a counter-protest outside.
Just as with his inauguration, he tossed a variety of different numbers in comparing attendance that were questionable and unconfirmed.
Daniel Dale (@ddale8)
Trump says he has 35,000 people at his rally and O'Rourke has 200 or 300. Those extremely do not seem like the correct numbers, but I will update you later.
Trump also poked fun at Virginia Governor Ralph Northam, who is currently under fire after admitting that he wore blackface as a young man.
“I like him,” Trump said. “Keeps us out of the paper.”
But of course, there were plenty of “build the wall” chants that brought the focus back to the border. Attendees in “Make America Great Again” hats sitting under giant signs reading “Finish the Wall” roared in approval when Trump wrongly asserted that construction on the wall had already begun - what has actually been built is just replacement fence.
Trump also made a series of false statements about Ice arresting more than 200,000 migrants with criminal histories. He repeated his false statement on how the border fence has affected security in El Paso. He accurately talk about hundreds of thousands of immigration cases in backlog.
Regardless of what the president said, the crowd loved every moment of the rally.
