Share Adjust Comment Print
NASHVILLE — Canadiens captain Shea Weber doesn’t like to talk about himself, so after the Predators practised Wednesday afternoon at the Centennial Sportsplex goalie Pekka Rinne was asked if he had a good story he could share about his old teammate in Nashville.
He had a good one.
The two have remained good friends since the trade that sent Weber from the Predators to the Canadiens in exchange for P.K. Subban on June 29, 2016. Rinne and Weber broke into pro hockey together as teammates with the AHL’s Milwaukee Admirals in 2005-06 and then played nine seasons together with the Predators before the trade.
After the 2012-13 season, Rinne underwent hip surgery and the Predators wanted the Finn to stay in Nashville that summer for his rehabilitation, which was expected to take four months. That resulted in the goalie’s favourite Weber story that he was willing to share.
Montreal Canadiens’ Brendan Gallagher falls over Nashville Predators goalie Pekka Rinne after scoring a goal despite a check by defenceman Shea Weber in Montreal on Feb. 22, 2016. John Mahoney / Montreal Gazette
“I was by myself here in Nashville, so I wasn’t allowed to stay by myself,” Rinne recalled. “So I stayed at his house. As soon as I got out of the hospital, I went there.
“He has two massive dogs, they’re like big horses,” the goalie added. “I stayed there maybe like four nights and the dogs are so smart that they knew I was hurt, so they would just lie beside me and kind of, I don’t know, protect me maybe if you will. It was a big surgery. It was great that I could stay over there and his wife was cooking for me. It was like a spa for me.”
Weber smiled — something he doesn’t do often when dealing with the media — after the Canadiens’ morning skate Thursday when told that Rinne had shared the story about his dogs — a Great Dane Mastiff named Dug, who weighs about 200 pounds, and an English Mastiff named Rod, who weighs about 160 pounds.
“He was pretty messed up, obviously, after his hip surgery,” Weber said about Rinne. “The dogs seemed to sense that something was going wrong with him or something was wrong with him and they pretty much didn’t leave his side. They spent a lot of time laying beside him. It’s not like they don’t mind laying around anyways. It was kind of perfect for them. They didn’t seem to leave his side there on the couch.”
While Weber doesn’t like to talk about himself, Rinne was happy to talk about what kind of friend and teammate he was during his days in Nashville.
“He was huge,” Rinne said. “He was our franchise player at the time. Obviously, he was the captain of the team, became an all-star, became an Olympic gold medallist, so many achievements individually. But also he made this whole organization better and more competitive. Obviously, he meant, and he means, a lot to this organization.
“He did a lot of stuff with Best Buddies (a charity that creates opportunities for people with intellectual and developmental disabilities), kids with special needs and with the Children’s Hospital, things like that,” the goalie added. “He doesn’t talk about those things, but he always had a big impact in the community. It wasn’t just that he was a great player on the ice, but among the fans and the community he was a very liked person because he was involved.”
On Thursday night, Rinne was on the opposite end of the ice when the Predators faced the Canadiens in Weber’s 900th career NHL game.
Montreal Canadiens captain Shea Weber takes a shot during warmup prior to game against the Florida Panthers on Jan. 15, 2019. John Mahoney / Montreal Gazette
“He’s obviously known for his booming shot,” Rinne said. “It’s a real danger on the power play. But when you talk about defencemen, you talk about a guy like him … I think about his all-around skill. He can bring the physical play, he has skill, he has the physical abilities, he can skate and, obviously, his size. When you have a guy like that on the blue line, other teams are going to notice that. They’re going to prepare for that matchup and it’s never going to be easy.”
A week before he was traded to the Canadiens, Weber received the NHL’s Mark Messier Leadership Award as captain of the Predators. In his first season as captain of the Canadiens, Weber has really made a mark on the team, which had a 20-10-2 record with him in the lineup heading into Thursday’s game.
“I think it’s his example … the way he carries himself,” Rinne said about Weber’s leadership skills. “I feel like he says stuff when he needs to, when it’s time for that, but he’s not always the big rah-rah guy all the time. His way to lead was by example. For a guy like me, who started playing pro hockey at the same time — even though he’s a little bit younger than me — I totally tried to follow him, look at him and the way he works, the way he just carries himself. How to be a pro. I feel like that’s the way he leads.”
The kind of guy who invites an injured teammate to stay at his house and be guarded by his two dogs.
