Save
On Sunday Missouri women’s basketball coach Robin Pingeton earned the 500th win of her coaching career. On Thursday, she nailed down arguably the biggest.
With star senior Sophie Cunningham overcoming an illness that had her hooked to IVs earlier in the day, the Tigers became the first Southeastern Conference team to topple Mississippi State in the regular season in nearly two years, knocking off the No. 5 Bulldogs 75-67 in Starkville, Miss.
Cunningham scored a game-high 24 points and had the crucial assist in the final minute, finding Cierra Porter for a 3-pointer, good for a six-point lead.
Missouri coach Robin Pingeton, right, talks to guard Sophie Cunningham during a timeout in the second half of the team's NCAA college basketball game against Mississippi State, Thursday, Feb. 14, 2019, in Starkville, Miss. Missouri won 75-67. (AP Photo/Rogelio V. Solis)
Rogelio V. Solis
“This train is moving,” Cunningham said on SEC Network after the game.
After some wobbly nonconference play and a 2-4 stretch against SEC teams, the Tigers (19-7, 8-4) have won three straight and moved into fourth place in the SEC, putting them in position to earn a double-bye in next month’s SEC tournament.
“We were really confident coming in,” Pingeton said in her postgame radio interview. “We have a lot of respect for Mississippi State. But I just love where our team is right now. We truly believed going into this game feeling we were going to win.”
After falling behind in the opening seconds of the fourth quarter, Mizzou outscored the defending SEC champion 21-11 the rest of the game, getting points from five different players in the quarter. Amber Smith added 16 points, while Akira Levy finished with 10 and five assists. Porter, fighting foul trouble all night, scored only one basket, but it was pivotal, a corner 3-pointer with 41 seconds left.
Missouri guard Akira Levy (2) shoots in front of Mississippi State center Teaira McCowan (15) during the second half of an NCAA college basketball game Thursday, Feb. 14, 2019, in Starkville, Miss. Missouri won 75-67. (AP Photo/Rogelio V. Solis)
Rogelio V. Solis
“Our kids really trusted each other and different kids stepped up at different times,” Pingeton said. “Akira had some really tough possessions but had some really big possessions.  … To beat a team like this it’s got to be an incredible team effort. We certainly had that tonight.”
Mizzou had been winless in three previous visits to MSU’s Humphrey Coliseum. The Bulldogs (22-2, 10-1) had won 32 consecutive home games and 26 consecutive regular-season SEC games. Their last SEC regular-season loss and last home loss came against Tennessee on Feb. 26, 2017. Mississippi State is the highest-ranked team Missouri has beaten on the road in team history — and the second top-10 team the Tigers have beaten on the road this season.
Cunningham, sick all night and day heading into the game, played a team-high 38 minutes, led MU with six rebounds, dished three assists and moved 112 points away from Mizzou’s career scoring record.
“It’s been rough. I didn’t do anything today,” she said. “I got a lot of IVs in me. I didn’t go to shootaround or anything. I actually just woke up at 4:45, but I’m going to do anything for this team. They’ve poured into me so much and I’m not the person who’s not going to play.”
The Tigers held Mississippi State 21 points below its season average as the Bulldogs shot a season-low 39.3 percent from the field. Anriel Howard led MSU with 21 points, but All-American center Teira McCowan scored only 12 on 11 shots. MU outscored the Bulldogs 30-24 in the paint and scored 24 points off their 18 turnovers.
Mizzou stuck with its game plan of packing the paint to prevent MSU from dominating the game inside.
“You can’t take away everything. We’re not that athletic,” Pingeton said. “ We’ve go to live and die with some things. We said they’re not a great 3-point shooting team. They’re going to hit some on us … but we didn’t want to get to the point we started to panic and guard the 3 and then give up the dribble drive and give up paint points. We just had to trust the game plan.”
Now with 2015 career points, Cunningham is 105 from moving past Renee Kelly for second on MU’s all-time list and 112 away from passing Joni Davis for the record. The Tigers have four regular-season games left and at least two postseason games remaining. If the Tigers only play six games the rest of the season, she’d have to average 18.7 to set the record.
But the way Mizzou played Thursday, this season could last much longer. Next up is Tennessee at Mizzou Arena on Sunday.
“We kind of have an inexperienced team compared to last year, but we’re gritty and we’re going to fight and people are going to doubt us,” Cunningham said. “But that motivates us. I’m so happy with everyone from top to bottom.”
Close
1 of 20
Missouri coach Robin Pingeton, right, talks to guard Sophie Cunningham during a timeout in the second half of the team's NCAA college basketball game against Mississippi State, Thursday, Feb. 14, 2019, in Starkville, Miss. Missouri won 75-67. (AP Photo/Rogelio V. Solis)
Rogelio V. Solis
