by Emily Donnellan
CC Image License
I’ve seen a lot of talk about the government shutdown around the web, mostly about what the shutdown means for access to government information. Open and continuous access is a concern but, in this blog post, I want to talk about my personal experience with the shutdown. This is in no way a political statement, nor does it reflect the views of my employer. I’m simply sharing how the government shutdown has shaped my workplace over the past few months.
I’m a branch librarian with the 9th circuit, so much of my experience has been shaped by my local district court. When inklings of a government shutdown began, I reached out to my Clerk of Courts who I happened to be in a meeting with. I asked, “Are you worried about the shutdown?” “No,” he laughed, “we’ve been through shutdowns before and we’ll be fine.” I remember nodding along and agreeing politely. I’d heard of Government shutdowns, but they were always something that happened to someone else. They didn’t affect me, so I wasn’t worried.
I only began to feel stress when the court moved the deadline for when we would go into unpaid status. This date moved around because the Court, unlike many other agencies, was able to continue paying salaries throughout the shutdown. This was made possible by deobligating funds from the current and previous fiscal year, cutting travel, and utilizing court fees. While I’m extremely grateful that I never missed a pay period, the mental load of stressing over whether we would get a paycheck has been very real.
I talked to a co-worker in January who was near tears because she didn’t know how she could pay her mortgage, childcare costs, and still put food on the table if we missed a paycheck. I have another co-worker who is now putting off a big purchase until after February 15th (when the continuing resolution expires) because he’s worried about the government shutting down a second time. At the beginning of December, my husband and I paid off his car. We depleted our savings account and have no safety net now. I too worry about a second shutdown.
The stress and uncertainty about paychecks adds to the mental load of employees. It can be hard to focus on your job when you’re thinking about your financial stability. I think that has been the hardest part of the shutdown, not the workload, or being unable to travel, but the mental load that a government shutdown has on employees. For weeks, the shutdown was all anyone could talk about in the office.
For the most part, my day-to-day job changed little during the shutdown. In my library, the cutbacks have been minimal, but noticeable nonetheless. We haven’t ordered any new books, and we’re unable to renew subscriptions. When our Idaho Statesman Newspaper subscription lapsed, we didn’t renew. But that’s about it. The quality of service and responsiveness from the library has been the same. If anything, those outside the government have been kinder because they knew we were affected by the shutdown.
Additionally, management at all levels of the Court has been very understanding and accommodating. Human Resources hosted meetings at both the circuit and district court levels. They provided resources and information for those affected. Everyone I’ve spoken with has tried to be positive during a challenging time. Judges and managers have told employees repeatedly that we’re valuable, and that the shutdown doesn’t reflect on the work we do or the services we provide. It’s been good to hear these things because it can be hard to feel valued when you might not get paid for the work you do. This shutdown reminded me that there are really stellar people working for the courts and in government. It made me happy to be a part of this community!
To me, government shutdowns were always something that affected someone else. I didn’t see the day-to-day struggles of those who weren’t paid or the mental load that a shutdown has on workers. With the current continuing resolution ending February 15th we are on the cusp of yet another government shutdown. We’re facing another time of uncertainty for employees, their families, and those who rely on the government for services. I thought now was a good time to share my personal experience and show others that government shutdowns affect real people. This isn’t happening to someone else. It’s happening to me. It’s happening to all of us.
Advertisements
