Feb. 14, 2019
Democrats say that by funding a daily average of 45,274 beds for detainees, officers will be forced to reduce the number of migrants in detention from about 49,000 to 40,000 by the end of the fiscal year. But with up to $750 million that can be shifted to detention centers and latitude for federal agencies in how money is used, Republicans say the number of beds could increase to as many as 58,500.
The bill provides for oversight of ICE, and places numerous limits on the agency, outlining protections for pregnant detainees, requirements for publicizing data about who is in custody and prohibitions on destroying records.
More than $560 million will go toward drug inspection at ports of entry, and money has been set aside for 600 more Customs and Border Protection officers. To address a backlog in the courts, the Executive Office for Immigration Review will receive $563.4 million, an increase of $59 million, for about 75 additional immigration judge teams.
The agreement also includes $415 million for humanitarian relief — medical care, transportation and food for migrants — along the southwestern border.
Several federal agencies covered by the homeland security bill — the Coast Guard, the Secret Service and the Transportation Security Administration among them — will receive funding increases and money for new equipment.
Some relief for science agencies, conservation efforts and medicinal research
Despite concerns that science agencies would take a hit under the Trump administration, Congress has continued to increase their funding, if incrementally.
Image
“This legislation represents a bipartisan compromise and will keep our government open while funding key priorities,” said Representative Nita Lowey, Democrat of New York.CreditErin Schaff for The New York Times
The proposal provides $985 million to the National Institute of Standards and Technology and $21.5 billion to NASA, including for activities related to moon exploration.
Additional allocations include $77 million for addressing the opioid epidemic and billions of dollars to combat H.I.V., AIDS and other infectious diseases, including malaria and Ebola.
Despite Mr. Trump’s isolationist stance, foreign allies got a lift
While the president has made no secret of his isolationist views on foreign policy, the spending package adds hundreds of millions of dollars for international disaster assistance and foreign aid.
That includes nearly an additional $1 billion toward peacekeeping activities, an additional $96 million to support United Nations missions, including in Afghanistan, Iraq and Libya, and an additional $1.4 billion to respond to refugee crises overseas.
Global nutrition programs will receive enough money to exceed the president’s budget request by $1.2 billion.
The agreement also rejected Mr. Trump’s proposal to eliminate foundations including the Asia Foundation, the United States African Development Foundation, the Inter-American Foundation and the United States Trade and Development Agency.
Video
The Trump administration’s hard-line stance on keeping migrants out is pushing asylum seekers to take remote and dangerous routes into the United States. And a wall might not be able to fix that.
A raise for federal workers and affordable housing programs
After federal workers endured a 35-day shutdown, lawmakers were anxious to provide some relief to the some 800,000 people furloughed or forced to work without pay. Though during the shutdown Mr. Trump issued an executive order freezing pay for federal civilian workers in 2019 — fulfilling a pledge he made over the summer — Congress agreed to secure an increase of nearly 2 percent for federal civilian employees.
The spending package also allocates $1 billion toward the 2020 census, and requires that the Census Bureau expand its efforts to reach hard-to-count communities. And it provides over $4.5 billion for initiatives like the Community Development Block Grant and the HOME program, which help build housing for low-income individuals.
There’s unfinished business
By Wednesday night, negotiators decided to keep several issues out of the final spending package to ensure as much broad support as possible.
Although the Federal Emergency Management Agency will receive more than $12 billion for disaster relief, lawmakers decided against including supplemental disaster relief for areas affected last year by storms, fires and other natural disasters.
Other matters that remain unresolved include back pay for federal contractors who were caught in the middle of the shutdown and an extension of the Violence Against Women Act, which expires Friday — although grants under the act are funded in the spending bill.
Negotiators also plan to introduce legislation that would address Mr. Trump’s efforts to curb immigration. It would do so by restoring the crucial protections under the Temporary Protected Status program and offering additional protections to the roughly 700,000 young immigrants brought to the country illegally as children, known as Dreamers.
A version of this article appears in print on , on Page A17 of the New York edition with the headline: Raises and Rebukes: What’s in Those 7 Spending Bills. Order Reprints | Today’s Paper | Subscribe
Related Coverage
