Share Adjust Comment Print
Can we agree the better team won Thursday night in Nashville?
Can we agree the inferior team played a solid game — only to be stymied, yet again, by a goaltender who owns them?
Yes, let’s agree on both assertions.
Nashville is a serious Stanley Cup aspirant.
The Canadiens — at least for this season — are a Cup non-contender who have given fans more than anyone possibly could have hoped for.
The better team won at Bridgestone Arena.
No surprise … and no knock on the team that lost.
Pekka Rinne was better than Carey Price.
And once Rinne’s teammates grabbed the third-period lead, they shut the Canadiens down.
It might have been different. After Price kept the game scoreless during a first period dominated by the home team, Rinne pulled off precisely the same magic in the second.
And then the Cup contender — playing on home ice — dominated the third.
The stat sheet tells the tale:
• Tomas Tatar had seven of the Canadiens 35 shots on Rinne. Max Domi had none. Neither did Jesperi Kotkaniemi. Jonathan Drouin had one.
• Phillip Danault and Brendan Gallagher were on for every Nashville goal. Drouin was on for two of them.
• The new fourth line played a shade over 10 minutes.
Claude Julien said his team played “a bit sloppy,” particularly during the first period, during which the Canadiens showed the rust of a four-day layoff.
“We were better in the second period,” the coach added. “And we should have scored on the chances we had.”
But they didn’t. The power play went 0-for-3 — Nashville’s sucked, as well — but the home team was opportunistic in the third.
Several commentators on the Liveblog faulted Price for the home team’s late resurgence.
I’m not so sure. Nashville had good chances. Price was screened on Boyle’s goal from downtown.
And Rinne owns the Canadiens. His numbers heading into the game: 8-2-2, GAA of 1.46, save percentage of .951.
Rinne was spectacular during the second period, but the Nashville goaltender was not severely tested in the third, once his team took the lead and shut the Canadiens down.
And now it’s on to Tampa Bay, which stomped Dallas 6-0 Thursday night.
The Canadiens play six of their next eight games on the road. They play 15 of their last 25 games away from the Bell Centre.
Things could get interesting.
