Save
GLENDALE, ARIZ. • The beat goes on for the Blues. Another night, another victory — eight in a row — which is their longest winning streak in 16 years.
More goals for Vladimir Tarasenko. He had two goals in Thursday’s 4-0 victory over Arizona, giving him 12 in his last 17 games and 24 for the season. But who’s counting? He isn’t.
“I got away a little this season from counting the goals and things, because of the start, and I just try to enjoy the game,” Tarasenko said. “Obviously, I’m not gonna lie. It feels nice it’s going in, and it feels more nice helping the team win.”
More winning by Binnington. Jordan Binnington made history with his seventh consecutive victory, matching the franchise record for a rookie goalie set by Brent Johnson during the 2000-01 season.
“That’s a nice thing to hear, I guess,” Binnington said. “I’m more excited about the direction the team’s heading, how disciplined we’re being and selfless. It’s fun to be a part of the team right now.”
That team direction continues to be upward. The Blues have exited wild-card land, moving up to third place in the Central Division. The combination of the Blues’ victory over Arizona and Dallas’ 6-0 loss to Tampa Bay left both teams with 63 points. But the Blues (29-22-5) hold down third place at the moment because they have played one fewer game than the Stars. Which was news to many in the Blues’ locker room.
“What?” Tarasenko said. “I get away from hockey news. It’s nice but everything else is tight. You know, other teams are winning so we need to keep going.”
But putting that in perspective, the Blues were dead last in the entire NHL on Jan. 2, with a 15-18-4 record and 11 points out of the second wild-card spot in the Western Conference. But no more.
To get there Thursday night before 12,553 at Gila River Arena, the Blues had to shake off an Arizona team that had been a recent nemesis. The Coyotes had flat-out embarrassed the Blues in the three most recent meetings between the teams, outscoring St. Louis by a combined 17-3.
For the Blues, those three games were characterized by pulled goalies, costly injuries and even a next-day “bag” skate dialed up by Mike Yeo after a 5-2 loss last season.
None of that happened Thursday. It was a precise, focused dissection of the Coyotes by a Blues team that has outscored the opposition 33-14 during the winning streak. The small but quick Arizona squad never got much of a chance to showcase its speed.
“We were obviously concerned as a coaching staff going into this game,” interim coach Craig Berube said. “They’ve got some fast forwards; they’re a competitive team. ... But our ‘D’ had great gaps all night, and then when they had to in the D-zone they did a good job closing quick with the sticks and they were heavy.”
Binnington had a few tough saves, but overall it was a low-volume night. He stopped all 21 shots he faced in improving to 11-1-1 as an NHL starter. His numbers in those starts: a 1.53 goals-against average and a .938 save percentage.
He looks like he’s living the dream right now. Can he keep this up?
“We’ll see,” replied Binnington, who never seems to waste words.
But back to the game ...
“We came out strong, and at the start of every period we came out hard, and that really set the tone for the rest of the period,” Binnington said. “Throughout the game we made great plays, smart defensive plays, we competed. Special teams were great tonight. So yeah, we had a great game.”
No one started stronger than Joel Edmundson. The rugged defenseman scored his second goal of the season just 3 1/2 minutes into the game. He nearly had another goal eight minutes in on a shot that appeared to go double-post and out.
And he assisted on Tarasenko’s first goal with 3 1/2 minutes left in first period, for his first assist since Nov. 30.
What exactly did Edmundson have for dinner pregame to come up with that kind of performance?
“I switched it up; I had a bagel before the game,” he said. “Maybe that was it, but I felt good out there.”
Cream cheese?
“(No.) With butter and honey,” he said. “I usually have a bowl of yogurt with some berries, maybe an English muffin. ... I’ll definitely go back with the bagel.”
As the youth say, it’s been a minute since Edmundson last scored. His only other goal came way back on Oct. 11 against Calgary, Game 3 of the season and his first game after he missed the first two to injury. With that in mind, fellow defenseman Robert Bortuzzo must have been inspired.
Bortuzzo closed out the night’s scoring with eight minutes left in the game with his second goal of the season. It was his first since Game 7, Oct. 20 at Toronto.
“It’s funny, before the game me and Bob-o (Bortuzzo) were talking that we both needed to get one tonight,” Edmundson said. “It’s weird things happen like that.”
The Edmundson and Bortuzzo goals made it 16 goals scored by Blues defensemen in 19 games since the start of the new year.
Combined, Edmundson and Bortuzzo have 25 career goals in 565 NHL games; or one more than Tarasenko has this season. When you get goals from both defensemen in one game, you know it’s going to be a good night.
“Well, they shoot the puck, and if you do good things and get the puck to the net with traffic and people around there, good things happen,” Berube said.
Lots of good things are happening lately for the Blues.
Do you read BLUE?
Get our FREE e-newsletter, with the latest news, talk and features about the St. Louis Blues.
This field is required.
