February 13, 2019
   views
A Gallup poll released Wednesday morning reveals that President Donald Trump has seen his job approval rating jump seven points since the middle of the border wall-centric recent government shutdown standoff. The Hill reports :
 
President Trump's approval rating rose 7 percentage points after the end of the recent 35-day partial government shutdown, a Gallup poll released early Wednesday showed.
The survey found that the president's approval rating jumped from 37 percent in mid-January during the heart of the shutdown to 44 percent in early February after he agreed to reopen the government.
The increase is largely attributable to more positive remarks among independents, pollsters found. That group's approval of Trump rose 6 percentage points from the January poll to the February poll, Gallup said.
Gallup's poll surveyed 1,016 adults from February 1 through February 10, and has a margin of error of four percentage points.
Gallup notes that Trump's overall approval rating has not been this high since the confirmation of his second U.S. Supreme Court nominee, Brett Kavanaugh, last October. Furthermore, the only two instances when Gallup has polled Trump's overall approval rating as higher than 44% have been the first week of his term and after his June 2018 meeting in Singapore with North Korea dictator Kim Jong Un.
Gallup's poll is hardly the first bit of good polling news this week for the president. On Wednesday, Rasmussen's daily tracking poll — which is generally more pro-Trump than is Gallup's polling — showed 50% of likely U.S. voters approving of President Trump's job performance, overall. Rasmussen's polling of Trump's overall approval rating also demonstrates a marked improvement from January's shutdown nadir.
 
The Gallup and Rasmussen polling come as the federal government braces for another possible shutdown. CNN today reports that Trump intends to sign a controversial border "deal" put forth this week by a congressional super-committee.
President Donald Trump intends to sign the border security deal to avoid another partial government shutdown, according to two sources who have spoken directly with the President.
Trump said Tuesday that he was "not happy" with the tentative deal reached by congressional negotiators late Monday night that falls far short of his original demands.
 
On Wednesday, he told reporters he would "take a very serious look" at the legislation, adding that he does not want the government to shut down again.
Congress faces a deadline to get a deal passed and signed by Trump before Friday.
The agreement, which includes $1.375 billion for a border barrier, falls well short of the $5.7 billion Trump originally demanded for a wall. It even falls short of the $1.6 billion included in a Senate package last year.
Conservatives this week have generally reacted poorly to the terms of the super-committee's "deal." Fox News host Sean Hannity blasted it as a "garbage compromise." Daily Wire Editor-in-Chief Ben Shapiro has similarly been very critical of the "deal" on " The Ben Shapiro Show " this week. Conservative Review Senior Editor Daniel Horowitz took particular issue with the deal's setting a lower limitation on ICE detentions:
Under the committee’s proposal, Democrats and RINOs agreed to provide enough funds for ICE to house 40,520 detainees by the end of the fiscal year. Not only is that below the 52,000 request from the administration, it is a 17.4 percent cut from the current level of 49,057 detainees. The border surge is growing every day, and without any desire to get rid of the magnets and fix the court problems with asylum, unaccompanied minors, and catch-and-release, the invasion will only grow as nicer weather returns in the early spring. Trump will have fewer resources to detain illegals than under the current policy, which will induce even more catch-and release, thereby incentivizing even more illegal immigration in a perpetual death spiral for American sovereignty.
What does Trump get in return? Fifty-five miles of non-concrete fencing in the Rio Grande Valley in eastern Texas. It’s like putting a Band-aid over a gushing arterial puncture wound.
