'They want more.' Hungry Emmaus basketball team reaches EPC final
By Kyle Craig | For lehighvalleylive.com | Posted February 15, 2019 at 12:31 AM
Emmaus High School boys basketball coach Steve Yoder has a different feeling about this year’s edition of the Green Hornets.
And he hopes that evolves into a championship feeling on Saturday night.
The second-seeded Green Hornets led the whole way during a 61-55 victory over sixth-seeded Allen in the Eastern Pennsylvania Conference semifinals at Parkland High School on Thursday night.
Emmaus (20-4) advances to meet Bethlehem Catholic, a 57-55 overtime winner over Nazareth, in the EPC championship 7 p.m. Saturday at Easton Area Middle School.
Emmaus' Ethan Parvel drives to the basket. (Kyle Craig | For lehighvalleylive.com)
The Green Hornets reached three championship finals during the summer, during the Cedar Beach Showcase, A-Town Throwdown and Allentown Summer League. After coming up short in those finals, the team is ready to claim some gold when it matters the most.
“I learned that this team is really hungry and they want more. We’ve been blessed to have some good teams in my 11 years here. But, I just get a different vibe from this team — that this team doesn’t want to settle,” Yoder said. “We’re obviously going to have our hands full … I do think the summer galvanized them … Finishing second three times did leave a sour taste in everybody’s mouth, including the kids. I think we’re going to embrace Saturday and have fun with it. I’m just having the best time I’ve had in my 11 years here, with this group.”
A 3-pointer from Ethan Parvel gave Emmaus a 12-1 lead with 3:43 remaining in the first quarter. A layup by the senior with less than a second to play in the first half pushed his team’s advantage to 29-17 at the break.
“We owned the game plan. The kids have been really good with that all year. We wanted to make sure they didn’t dribble-drive us to death — our one- and two-pass-away help was outstanding,” Yoder said. “We knew they were going to double Mark (Swedberg) and Zach (Sabol) in the post. I thought our ball movement was equally fantastic. We swung the ball, got the defense loose and everybody attacked the basket.”
Emmaus' Mark Swedberg puts up a shot between Allen's Allen Young (23) and Emmanuel Ozuna. (Kyle Craig | For lehighvalleylive.com)
Allen (14-9) cut the Hornets’ advantage to 55-50 with 1:27 remaining in the fourth quarter. Emmaus, however, put the game out of reach with a 6-2 spurt.
“Yoder told us that our senior leadership needed to matter in that situation, which it did, in my opinion,” Swedberg said. “We’re just tired of taking second place. We went 0-3 this summer. We’re really trying to make a statement: that stops now.”
Parvel and Bryce Diehl both finished with 14 points. Swedberg added 12.
“Bryce was just outstanding tonight. I thought Ethan attacked the basket. Cameron (Brooks) managed the game for us in so many ways; Danny Bohman came in, as well. I thought our guards were outstanding,” Yoder said.
Nate Ellis and Emmanuel Ozuna tallied 14 points apiece for the Canaries.
About Us
