Winsett wins it at buzzer for McCracken
By TYLER DIXON Kentucky New Era
Feb 14, 2019
McCracken County's Jackson Sivills (left) drives by Hopkinsville's Jacarius Burks during the Mustangs' 55-52 victory Thursday at Hopkinsville High School.
Tyler Dixon | Kentucky New Era
Save
HOPKINSVILLE — In a game that looked to be over after the first few minutes, the Hopkinsville Tigers made a valiant comeback Thursday against McCracken County but fell short 55-52 due to a Trevor Winsett game-winner.
With 20.8 left on the clock, Hoptown took a timeout and set up a plan for the final shot. A shot attempt was no good, and Wimsett grabbed the ball and crossed halfcourt before letting go a prayer to give the Mustangs the victory.
While the end of the game would be close, it didn't start out that way as the Mustangs made a statement in the early going after they went up 16-0 to start the game.
McCracken County coach Burlin Brower knew it would be a tough game coming in.
“We knew the game would be called different,” Brower said. “That was something we told our guys, ‘You’re going to have to adjust to it.’ Little did I know we were going to come out and open a 20-point lead and then all of a sudden start throwing the ball away like we did.
“All in all it’s a good learning experience. Our kids got in panic mode again, we had some different press-breakers, take care of the ball. I think maybe when we go back to practice and talk about taking care of the ball they’ll be a little more conscientious about what I’m talking about.”
McCracken County’s Mitchell Guthrie and Noah Dumas hit 3-pointers to start the game for the Mustangs, as they couldn’t miss early on.
Hopkinsville (16-12) would finally get on the board with a bucket plus the foul from Jacarius Burks, but it would be a big hill to climb for the rest of the game.
With 5:15 left in the first half, McCracken County took a 25-5 lead and looked as if it would head back to Paducah with a big road win over the Tigers.
Late in the first half, Hopkinsville's Jamarion Sharp got loose on a fast break and delivered the rim rattler to cut the deficit to 33-17.
It was Sharp's dunk that woke up the Tigers, as they showed their first signs of life in the game.
Hoptown chipped away at the lead the entire second half after trailing 36-19 at the midway point.
Senior guard DeEvan Williams buried two 3-pointers to cut the deficit to 38-27 with 4:45 left in the game.
Arthur McKnight stole the inbound to start the fourth quarter and laid it in, then another bucket from Mercer made it 45-41 with 6:30 left in the game.
Hoptown got its first lead with 1:58 left in the game when Burks buried a 3-pointer to give the Tigers a 50-48 advantage.
Two free throws from Jackson Sivills gave McCracken the late 52-50 lead then Jamarion Sharp got a friendly roll to tie the game at 52-52 just before a Mustang turnover.
The Tigers had their shot to win it, but Mercer's floater was off as Wimsett's grabbed the rebound and started up the floor.
Despite Burks and Mercer's defense, Wimsett banked in the 3-pointer to give McCracken County the 55-52 victory.
Burks finished with a game-high 23 points, including three 3-pointers. Mercer was the only other Tiger to finish in double digits.
McCracken County (27-3) was led by Noah Dumas' 21 points, as Sivills added 16 in the win.
Brower said it will definitely be a game he remembers.
“I’ll be honest, I’ve been fortunate in my coach career not to blow a 20-point lead, but I really thought a while ago I was getting ready to blow one,” he said.
McCracken County plays at 7:30 p.m. Monday against Community Christian at St. Mary in the 2nd District tournament.
———
McCracken Co. 22 14 9 10 — 55
Hopkinsville 5 14 18 15 — 52
MCHS: Noah Dumas 21, Jackson Sivills 16, Ronnie Jones 1, Trevor Winsett 7, Mitchell Guthrie 8, Grant Davis 2; HHS: Arthur McKnight 2, Jamarion Sharp 6, Jacarius Burks 23, Don Victor 2, DeEvan Williams 8, Dajuan Mercer 10.
