January 21, 2019 · by Carmela Countz · in News
Vice President Mike Pence was harshly criticized on Sunday for quoting the Rev. Martin Luther King Jr. in his most famous speech in defending President Donald Trump’s efforts to persuade Congress to fund construction of a wall along the U.S.-Mexico border.
Appearing on CBS’ “Face the Nation” on Sunday — a day before the federal holiday honoring King — Pence quoted a passage from King’s “I Have a Dream” speech at the Lincoln Memorial in Washington on Aug. 28, 1963: “One of my favorite quotes from Dr. King was ‘Now is the time to make real the promises of democracy.'”
Speaking of King, the vice president went on: “You think of how he changed America. He inspired us to change through the legislative process, to become a more perfect union.
When asked what Democrats were involved in conversations about a DACA deal, @VP points to “good conversations” w/ Dems. He says, “The leadership has discouraged them, in the House and the Senate, from engaging the administration, so I want to respect those conversations.” pic.twitter.com/T3YLTkQx8h
— Face The Nation (@FaceTheNation) January 20, 2019
Left unnoted was that, barely a year later, in a speech in East Berlin, King specifically addressed the subject of the Berlin Wall, which divided Berlin from 1961 to 1989.
Eleanor Holmes Norton, the District of Columbia’s Democratic non-voting delegate to Congress, tweeted: “We can’t allow Vice President Pence to get away with cleansing the president on Martin Luther King’s birthday.”
. @EleanorNorton : We've got to remember on #MartinLutherKing 's birthday the progress we've made. At the same time we can't allow Vice President Pence to get away with cleansing the president on Martin Luther King's birthday. #AMJoy pic.twitter.com/ODcxkl6OCj
— AM Joy w/Joy Reid (@amjoyshow) January 20, 2019
The NAACP, which King served as an executive board member in Montgomery, Alabama, called the remarks “an insult to Dr. King’s legacy.”
Rep. Jackie Speier, D-Calif., likewise called Pence’s use of King’s words “beyond disgraceful.”
To equate the legacy of one of America’s finest statesmen and champions of civil rights with a vanity project built on racist ideology and hatred is beyond disgraceful. @VP owes the American people, and the memory of Dr. King, an immediate and profuse apology. @POTUS is no MLK!
— Jackie Speier (@RepSpeier) January 20, 2019
Meanwhile, Ibram X. Kendi, founder and director of the Antiracist Research & Policy Center at American University in Washington, noted Pence’s comments and tweeted: “ They ‘honor’ MLK every year by assassinating who he was.”
Spread The Love!
