Pulwama Attack: Virat Kohli, Cricket Fraternity Condemn Terror Attack
Updated: 15 February 2019 13:04 IST
Virat Kohli took to Twitter to send his condolences after Pulwama attack.
Written by Tanya Rudra Written by Tanya Rudra
Read Time : 3-min
Virat Kohli condemned Pulwama attack in his tweet. © AFP
Virat Kohli took to Twitter to send condolences after nearly 40 Central Reserve Police Force (CRPF) personnel were killed and many others injured when terrorists targeted a convoy with a car bomb in Jammu and Kashmir's Pulwama district on Thursday. Team India skipper Virat Kohli , while condemning the attack, wrote that he was in shock after the worst attack ever on security personnel in the state. "I'm shocked after hearing about the attack in Pulwama, heartfelt condolences to the martyred soldiers & prayers for the speedy recovery of the injured jawaans," Virat Kohli tweeted.
I'm shocked after hearing about the attack in Pulwama, heartfelt condolences to the martyred soldiers & prayers for the speedy recovery of the injured jawaans.
— Virat Kohli (@imVkohli) February 15, 2019
Prime Minister Narendra Modi, vowed that the "sacrifices of our brave security personnel shall not go in vain". 
As the entire nation stands in solidarity with the families of the martyrs, the cricket fraternity was not far behind.
Virender Sehwag, Rohit Sharma , VVS Laxman, Shikhar Dhawan, Suresh Raina and Mohammed Kaif took to Twitter to condemn the attack and to send their condolences to the families of the martyrs.
"Really pained by the cowardly attack on our CRPF in J&K in which our brave men have been martyred . No words are enough to describe the pain.  I wish a speedy recovery to those injured.#SudharJaaoWarnaSudhaarDenge," Virender Sehwag tweeted.
"Sad and pained to hear about the dastardly attack on our brave CRPF men in #Pulwama in which many of our jawans have been martyred. I pray for a quick and speedy recovery of those injured in the attack," Laxman wrote on Twitter.
Really pained by the cowardly attack on our CRPF in J&K in which our brave men have been martyred . No words are enough to describe the pain. I wish a speedy recovery to those injured. #SudharJaaoWarnaSudhaarDenge
— Virender Sehwag (@virendersehwag) February 14, 2019
Shocked and horrified by what happened #Pulwama . The day we all celebrated love some cowards spread hatred. Thinking about the jawans and their families. India keep them in your prayers.
— Rohit Sharma (@ImRo45) February 15, 2019
Sad and pained to hear about the dastardly attack on our brave CRPF men in #Pulwama in which many of our jawans have been martyred . I pray for a quick and speedy recovery of those injured in the attack.
— VVS Laxman (@VVSLaxman281) February 14, 2019
Deeply saddened and disturbed by the news. I condemn the terror attack in #Pulwama . My condolences to the families of the jawans who sacrificed their lives.
— Shikhar Dhawan (@SDhawan25) February 14, 2019
Really pained to hear about the attack on our #CRPF men who have been martyred in the attack in J&K. I pray the coward attackers are taught a lesson at the earliest.
— Mohammad Kaif (@MohammadKaif) February 14, 2019
Appalled and deeply disturbed by the news of CRPF jawans killed in Kashmir's Pulwama. My thoughts and prayers with the martyrs' families.
— Suresh Raina (@ImRaina) February 14, 2019
Reports suggested that the vehicle used by the terrorists was a Mahindra Scorpio carrying more than 350 kg of explosives. 
The injured have been moved to the army base hospital in Srinagar, 20 km from the attack site. Pakistan-based terrorist group Jaish-e-Mohammed has claimed responsibility for the attack.
(With PTI inputs)
