Swimming | Ashland, Loudonville ready for districts
 
By WILLIAM KOSILESKI Staff Writer
Thursday
Feb 14, 2019 at 9:50 PM Feb 14, 2019 at 11:30 PM
Only one meet separates the Ashland High School and Loudonville High School swimming teams from competing for a state championship in their respective divisions.
Both the Ashland boys and girls swimming teams as well as the Loudonville girls swim team will partake in districts this weekend, and both schools have a legitimate chance to send multiple swimmers to the state meets next weekend.
"I think this is the first time we've been eyeballing states with Loudonville swimmers ever in the history of the school," Loudonville coach J.B. Ballenger said.
Loudonville will compete in the Division II Northeast District at Cleveland State University on Friday, while Ashland competes in the Division I Northwest District at Bowling Green State University on Saturday. Both meets start at 3 p.m.
Although the Loudonville girls team is small in number, four swimmers will participate in at least two races on Friday. As for Ashland, 13 swimmers will be competing at districts in some way, shape or form.
"It's always a long season and we kind of started off the year telling them that we do what we do all season long to get to these meets in February," Ashland coach Krissy Geren said. "That's what we're doing this for, and we remind them of that often. So to go to (sectionals) and have it pay off is priceless."
After finishing fourth of 39 teams at sectionals last weekend, Loudonville enters districts exactly where it wants to be, according to Ballenger.
"Every single swimmer was well ahead of where they were last year at this time," he said. "So we are entering districts with some confidence."
At districts, Loudonville’s Madison Smith will be competing in the 100-yard butterfly and the 100 backstroke, while Britney Sage will race in the 100 breaststroke and also in the 100 butterfly.
Sage and Smith join Mya Switzer and Sara Caroll on the Redbirds’ relay team, which will compete in the 200 medley relay and the 200 freestyle relay.
"Throughout the season, they've said, 'Hey, I just want to make sure I'm doing what I can to be the fastest on the relay,’" Ballenger said. "And all four of those girls have really owned it."
"For a smaller team, they've really come together like a sorority of girls," Ballenger added. "I don't know how else to put it. They all support each other really well."
The Arrows also had plenty of success at sectionals, as 57 of the 62 races they competed in ended in lifetime best swims, according to Geren.
"I was super excited about that," she said. "Even some of our kids that weren't fully rested had best times."
Senior Ross Garrison (50 free, 100 free, 200 medley relay, 400 free relay) is one of six Ashland swimmers that will be competing in four events on Saturday. The others are Jun Cho, Bailey Parsons, Seth Will, Rylan McDaniel and Cami McDaniel.
"I feel good about the team," Geren said. "I'm excited to see what they can do and I'm really excited to see what the kids who were only partially rested last weekend can get out of this meet this weekend."
AHS senior Addi McDaniel is competing in three events – girls 100 back, 200 medley relay and 400 free relay.
Note: Ashland divers Nick Danison and Nathan Young competed at the Division I Northwest District diving meet on Tuesday.
Never miss a story
Choose the plan that's right for you.
Digital access or digital and print delivery.
