United for U.S. Coalition
United Way Launches Fund to Help Those Impacted by Government Shutdown
Since launching the United for U.S. Coalition Jan. 11 to mobilize our corporate, labor and other partners around furloughed workers, United Way has received many inquiries from people who want to help.
In response, we launched the United for U.S. Fund to give individuals from all walks of life an easy, safe way to help civil servants and others impacted by the ongoing shutdown. Every dollar will be distributed to local United Ways serving furloughed workers to support critical needs like food, energy assistance, utilities, rent, health care, and more.
Support the United For U.S. Fund
This national fund will support basic needs for vulnerable workers in affected communities.  To donate, click below or text SHUTDOWN to 40403.
Donate Now
The  2-1-1 non-emergency service  anchors United Way’s community support by providing information about local social services, including the availability of public benefits and corporate assistance programs. 2-1-1, which connects callers to resources and aid for monthly living expenses, continues to see an uptick in calls.
 
Partners
Are you helping federal workers? Would you like to find out how you can get involved? Please  contact us .
United Way expresses our thanks to the following partners:
Local Services
United Way owes a debt of gratitude to all the federal workers who have supported their communities over the years. United Ways across the country are committed to standing by federal workers and others impacted by the shutdown in their time of need. Below are links to funds or details about what local United Ways are doing to support furloughed workers across the country. 
United Way of the National Capital Area (Washington D.C.) has provided $50,000 through its Emergency Assistance Fund to area nonprofits to meet people’s basic needs.  
United Way of Bay County  (Bay City, Mich.)
United Way of Genesee County (Flint, Mich.) launched a fund to help federal workers with emergency needs, specifically food, transportation and current utility payments. Learn how you can help .
Mile High United Way (Denver, Colo.) has a variety of resources for workers through 2-1-1 to connect people to health care services, food pantries, mental health resources, childcare, and utility and eviction prevention assistance.
United Way of Greater Richmond and Petersburg (Richmond, Va.)
United Way for Southeastern Michigan (Detroit, Mich.) is directing federal employees who call 2-1-1 to available resources, and coordinating food box distribution with local food pantries.
United Way of King County (Seattle, Wash.) is participating in local resource fairs for federal workers organized by the Port of Seattle.
