Congress passes deal to avert shutdown as Trump plans emergency declaration to build wall – as it happened
Senate votes 83 to 16 to advance a spending package designed to prevent another government shutdown
Play Video
Mitch McConnell: Trump to sign funding bill but declare national emergency – video
Gabrielle Canon in Oakland (now) and Ben Jacobs in Washington (earlier) and Erin Durkin in New York (earlier)
Thu 14 Feb 2019 21.01 EST
First published on Thu 14 Feb 2019 08.54 EST
Details of President Donald Trump’s physical last week were just released. Trump now weigh 243 pounds, four more than he weighed last year.
Steve Herman (@W7VOA)
16:07
The DNC has released its criteria for the first two debates.
They will have room for up to 20 candidates who meet one of two criteria, getting 1% in three qualifying polls before the debate or raise money from 65,000 unique donors and a minimum of 200 donors per state from 20 different states.
Updated
16:00
Sarah Sanders was just asked by reporters about potential legal challenges to a national emergency declaration.
We’re very prepared, but there shouldn’t be [legal challenges]. The president’s doing his job. Congress should do theirs.”
A procedural vote to advance the government funding bill just passed in the Senate by a veto proof margin.
Senate Cloakroom (@SenateCloakroom)
Nancy Pelosi is keeping her options open on Trump’s planned declaration of a national emergency.
Lissandra Villa (@LissandraVilla)
Pelosi on national emergency: “I may. That’s an option,” Pelosi says when asked if Dems would file a legal challenge. “We will review our options, we will prepare to respond appropriately to it.”
15:35
The White House has issued a formal statement on the government funding bill and the national emergency declaration
“President Trump will sign the government funding bill, and as he has stated before, he will also take other executive action - including a national emergency - to ensure we stop the national security and humanitarian crisis at the border. The President is once again delivering on his promise to build the wall, protect the border, and secure our great country.”
McConnell interrupted Senator Chuck Grassley to speak on the floor and Grassley was not happy.
Jake Sherman (@JakeSherman)
WOW.. McConnell interuppted grassley speech to announce the vote and national emergency. Grassley just SCREAMED at McConnell: “you’re rude. You’re just simply rude.” Said it would’ve taken 5 minutes for him to finish.
15:20
House majority leader Steny Hoyer just weighed in on the announcement that Trump would declare a national emergency in an interview with MSNBC.
I think declaring an a national emergency where there is no national emergency is not good for the president to do and not good precedent for future presidents.
Updated
15:14
Richard Luscombe
A million-dollar Balinese-style temple that will be burned to ground in May was a gathering point for students of Florida’s Marjory Stoneman Douglas high school on Thursday as they remembered their 14 classmates and three teachers killed a year ago today in one of the nation’s deadliest mass shootings.
The Temple of Time , an ornate giant wooden palace designed by the California-based artist David Best, and built with the aid of a $1 million grant from Bloomberg Philanthropies, was erected in neighbouring Coral Springs as a temporary memorial for the victims of the Parkland shooting. By early afternoon Thursday, dozens of MSD students and their families had arrived to write messages on the temple’s plywood walls or lay flowers and other momentos.
The solemn gathering was one of a number of commemorative events in Parkland and neighbouring cities on the first anniversary of the tragedy. Thousands were expected to attend an interfaith service later in the day at Pine Trails Park, site of the official memorials and a vigils one year ago.
In the tradition of many of Best’s other works, including at the notorious Burning Man festivals in Nevada, the Coral Springs temple will be set alight in late May in “the burn”, which the artist says is “a casting off of the demons of pain grief and sorrow.”
“We couldn’t call it a temple of healing, I don’t have that power,” said Best, who was emotional as he hugged many of the students. “The process of healing takes a long time.”
