drukken 
Foto: Associated Press/Jacquelyn Martin President Donald Trump speaks to the media as he leaves the White House, Thursday Jan. 10, 2019, in Washington, en route for a trip to the border in Texas as the government shutdown continues.
President Donald Trump’s address to the nation on Tuesday  night warned of a life-threatening crisis of illegal immigration  erupting at the southern border.
Experts say there is no crisis and that the problems that do  exist at the border can’t be solved with a wall.
A wall won’t stop migrants desperate to flee their home  countries. Nor will it stop drugs from entering the US, mostly  through the ports of entry. Nor will it solve the issue of crime  by unauthorized immigrants, which occurs at a lower rate than    by US-born citizens.
What will reduce illegal immigration, experts say, is  providing a way for people to come to the US legally.
President Donald Trump’s televised address to the nation on Tuesday night warned of a  nationwide, life-threatening crisis stemming from the US-Mexico  border, wrought by an influx of unauthorized immigrants.
He described a series of gruesome crimes – immigrants beheading,  dismembering, raping, stabbing, or beating American citizens. He  declared that “thousands” more would be killed “if we don’t act  right now.”
The president described the situation as a “growing humanitarian  and security crisis at our southern border.”
But the reality, experts say, is far different. And they say the “physical barrier” Trump is demanding will not solve the violence  Trump depicted, nor the problems that do exist along the southern  border.
“There’s not a crisis at the border,” said Jordan Bruneau, a  senior policy analyst for the conservative-leaning Becoming  American Initiative. “A border wall is a Band-Aid solution to the  situation of illegal immigrants wanting to come to the country.”
But he said there’s a longer-term and far more effective fix that  would eliminate the need to immigrate illegally: grant migrants  work visas so they can come to the US legally.
Lees ook op Business Insider
Read more: ‘How much more American blood must we  shed?’: Trump addresses the nation amid government shutdown over  border-wall funding
Foto: A migrant jumps the border fence to get into the US in December.sourceAssociated Press/Daniel Ochoa de Olza
The flaws in Trump’s arguments demonstrated multiple  misconceptions about the problems at the US-Mexico border, the  people who cross the border, and how they cross it
In his televised address, the president cited drugs pouring  through the border as a reason to build a barrier, saying, “Every  week, 300 of our citizens are killed by heroin alone, 90% of  which floods across from our southern border.”
But government data has shown that the vast majority of drugs  coming across the border are brought in through legal ports of  entry – often smuggled in using vehicles – and not unguarded  stretches.
Trump also decried “uncontrolled, illegal migration,” even though  many unauthorized immigrants in the US entered the country  legally and overstayed their visas, and illegal border crossings  remain near a 40-year low .
He also seized on the idea that criminal immigrants jeopardize  the safety of Americans, arguing that “thousands of Americans  have been brutally killed by those who illegally entered our  country” and that “thousands more lives will be lost if we don’t  act right now.”
But multiple studies have found that immigrants commit crimes at  far lower rates than US-born Americans.
Alex Nowrasteh, a senior policy analyst at the libertarian Cato  Institute who has researched the issue, said that Trump was  trying to whip up fear among Americans about a problem that has  statistical significance.
“They absolutely should not be as frightened as he thinks they  should be,” he told INSIDER.
Trump “beat to death the notion that immigrants are coming here  to kill us, to murder us, to rape us, to rob from us,” Nowrasteh  said. “And the evidence simply does not support that. It is  untrue. It has been repeated ad nauseam. And I don’t think the  American public believes it.”
Though Trump pointed out specific cases of immigrants accused of  brutal crimes – including a California police officer who  authorities said was shot to death during a traffic stop last  month at the hands of an unauthorized immigrant – Nowrasteh said  anecdotes of violent crimes do not represent a trend among  immigrants.
Instead, Nowrasteh said, the data shows that the American public  has more to fear from US-born citizens.
“Out of any large population like that, there’s going to be some  bad apples, of course. And some immigrants have done horrible  things and committed terrible crimes,” he said. “But that’s no  reason to punish the immigrants who haven’t done anything. And  when we take a look at the evidence, they are less likely to  commit homicides, they are less likely to commit crimes, they are  less likely to be incarcerated than native-born Americans.”
It doesn’t all add up to a ‘security crisis’ at the border. But  there is a clear problem.
There may not be a security crisis at the border, but there is a  humanitarian crisis unfolding as detention centers and shelters  continue to run at or above capacity. Two children who traveled  to the US from Guatemala recently died while in custody, raising questions about the government’s ability to care for  the influx of migrants.
But much of the problem along the border within the past year has  stemmed from the changing demographics of migrants there, not the  number of people who are crossing.
Roughly 20 years ago, US Border Patrol agents were arresting 1.6  million people at the border annually, many of them single  Mexican men looking for work. Nowadays, Border Patrol agents are  arresting a fraction of that – fewer than 400,000 people in fiscal 2018 – and they are  primarily arresting Central American families fleeing poverty and  violence and seeking asylum.
Foto: sourceShayanne Gal/Business Insider
Over the past year, the number of families apprehended crossing  the US-Mexico border has shot up to an all-time high. Customs and  Border Protection data obtained this week by The  Washington Post showed that a record 27,518 members of  families were apprehended in December alone.
“There is indeed a humanitarian crisis at the border – but it is  one of this administration’s own making,” Lorella Praeli, the  deputy political director of the American Civil Liberties Union,  said in a statement. “Its manufactured security emergency isn’t  credible.”
Praeli added that Trump and Homeland Security Secretary Kirstjen  Nielsen “have lied about border statistics and conditions,  continued to push narratives that are proven false, and  egregiously distorted realities.”
This surge in migrant families, many of whom request asylum once  they arrive in the US, has triggered a slew of logistical  problems that authorities have struggled to accommodate. Trump  administration officials have conceded that the Border Patrol  stations where migrants are brought after being arrested were never intended to shelter children .
“They’re designed to be problematic and not safe,” Anne Chandler,  the executive director of the Tahirih Justice Center’s Houston  office, told INSIDER. “The other issue is that we have  border-control strategies that didn’t start in this  administration but date back to the ’80s, where we put in  measures to try to hamper the abilities of individuals to cross  our border, pushing individuals into more desolate areas.”
The Trump administration has sought to temper the flow of  asylum-seekers with a variety of deterrence policies, perhaps the  most infamous being last spring’s family separations, which split  thousands of migrant children from their parents and prompted  multiple lawsuits and a monthslong effort to reunite them.
The administration has also been criticized for imposing a  practice called “metering,” allowing only a small number of  migrants at a time to enter the US at ports of entry to seek  asylum. But it has largely backfired. Thousands of migrants from  multiple caravans remain stalled in Tijuana, Mexico, living on  streets and in overflowing shelters, with some growing so  impatient that they simply jump the border fence.
And a wall won’t alleviate the influx of asylum-seekers either
The problem with these strategies, Chandler said, is that they’re  not effective deterrents for migrants who are desperate and have  little to lose. The fencing along the US-Mexico border hasn’t  dissuaded them from crossing, and neither would a wall.
Instead, it has pushed migrants to travel farther into the desert  to cross in unguarded areas.
“When they are pushed into these more remote areas to cross the  border, their vulnerability and their health situation  escalates,” Chandler said. “In a situation like today, when we  have metering going on at every border point that I know about … when we’re denying that and putting individuals at more  difficult points of entry, you increase the vulnerability of  kids.”
None of these problems – the influx of families, the lack of  resources awaiting them, and the fact that some enter the US  illegally before requesting asylum, would be solved with a wall,  Nowrasteh said.
“These people are coming in and turning themselves in to Border  Patrol to ask for asylum primarily,” he said. “A border wall  won’t change that at all.”
He added that allowing migrant families to apply for work visas  up front, instead of forcing them to seek roundabout ways to  enter the US and request asylum, would cut down on illegal  entries and actually produce a net benefit for the US.
“There will be more people here to work hard to achieve the  American dream, to buy goods and services, to rent property and  otherwise engage in the economy,” Nowrasteh said.
Foto: sourceJohn Moore/Getty
Instead of building a wall, we should fix our pathway for  asylum-seekers, experts say
A better way to allocate the $5.7 billion Trump is demanding for  a wall would be to facilitate the flow of asylum-seekers entering  the country, Nowrasteh said. That would include investing in more  Border Patrol agents, hiring more immigration judges, and  creating detention spaces with humane conditions.
But the Trump administration has sought to demonize migrants,  using a caravan of migrants as a scare tactic before the 2018  midterm elections and accusing them of filing frivolous asylum  claims when their lives aren’t truly in danger in their home  countries.
The latter accusation isn’t necessarily incorrect, Bruneau said.  But he added that there’s nothing wrong with migrants looking for  work in the US.
Instead of turning them away, he said, why not let them come  legally?
“A big portion of them are economic migrants, and there’s nothing  wrong with that – that is the American tradition,” he said. “They’re coming to seek a better life, and if they want to come  here to work … there should be a way for them to do so. And real  Republicans should try to look to address this underlying  problem.”
Despite Trump’s claim on Tuesday that America welcomes “lawful  immigrants who enrich our society and contribute to our nation,” there are few options for those who want to enter the country to  work. The pathways to legal immigration are riddled with bureaucratic hurdles.
Nowrasteh said there’s little reason to oppose legal immigration  and argued that even so-called low-skilled immigrants raise wages  and create jobs.
Despite the assumption that immigrants take American workers’ jobs, there’s evidence pointing to the contrary, Nowrasteh said.  Immigrants typically compete against other  immigrants in the US workforce, not Americans.
“On top of that, they are less likely to commit crime, less  likely to commit terrorism, and less likely to have other social  pathologies,” he continued. “So it’s a pretty big win across the  board.
“Now, if you just don’t like foreigners, then there’s nothing I  can tell you.”
