Where Trump's Additional Border Money Will Come From
Rebecca Ballhaus
In addition to the wall funds in the spending bill, White House acting chief of staff Mick Mulvaney said Friday that President Trump will seek to divert about $6.7 billion from elsewhere in the government to build 234 miles of steel bollard wall—a move that is certain to invite court challenges. Mr. Mulvaney said the president was taking executive action because Congress had proved “simply incapable” of allowing the level of wall funding Mr. Trump had demanded.
Included in that will be $2.5 billion that Mr. Trump will divert from the Department of Defense’s counter-drug efforts, $600 million from the Treasury Forfeiture Fund, and $3.6 billion from military construction efforts, Mr. Mulvaney said. The latter bucket of funds can only be accessed through an emergency declaration.
A senior administration official said the White House was still reviewing which military construction projects would be affected by the emergency declaration, and would seek to target projects repairing facilities that “might be able to wait a couple of months into next year.”
A Border Patrol officer guards the U.S.-Mexico border at Nogales, Ariz., earlier this month. Friday’s moves by the president were set to trigger a new phase in the immigration fight. ARIANA DREHSLER/AGENCE FRANCE-PRESSE/GETTY IMAGES
Highlights
Twitter
Trump to Allot $8 Billion in Wall Funds Through Spending Bill, Emergency Declaration
President Trump on Friday was set to sign a spending bill that keeps the government open and lay out his plans to divert billions of dollars of funds to build a wall on the southern U.S. border, including the declaration of a national emergency. The moves stave off a second government shutdown but have ignited a new battle over the legality of his border-spending ambitions.
In addition to the wall funds in the spending bill, White House acting chief of staff Mick Mulvaney said Friday that President Trump will seek to divert about $6.7 billion from elsewhere in the government to build 234 miles of steel bollard wall.
Included in that will be $2.5 billion that Mr. Trump will divert from the Department of Defense’s counter-drug efforts, $600 million from the Treasury Forfeiture Fund, and $3.6 billion from military construction efforts, Mr. Mulvaney said. The latter bucket of funds can only be accessed through an emergency declaration.
Mr. Mulvaney pushed back on concerns about setting a precedent through the emergency declaration. “It isn’t as if he didn’t get what he wanted and he’s just waving a magic wand,” he said. “This is authority given to the president in law already.”
A Border Patrol unit drives near a section of reinforced U.S.-Mexico border fence seen from Tijuana,  Mexico.Guillermo Arias/Agence France-Presse/Getty Images
Rebecca Ballhaus, Kristina Peterson
