The real national emergency is not border security
Chan Lowe
  (Chan Lowe)
U-T Letter writers
The main producer of fake news is the dude who resides at the White House. There is no national emergency at the border between Mexico and the U.S. He keeps trying to whip up fear where there is nothing to fear.
Our defenses are good and the people who defend our country need to be supported with no more government shut downs created by the same fake news guy who gets to live at the White House.
John H. Borja
San Diego
“We need the wall, and it has to be built, and we want to build it fast." So says Donald Trump .
Really?
Let's review the scoreboard. For two years, from 2016 to 2018, Donald Trump and the Republican Party had control of all the branches of government: the Senate , the House and the Supreme Court. Neither Trump nor the GOP proposed building a multi-billion dollar wall.
Why not ?
Now, after the Democratic Party won a majority of seats in the House of Representatives, Trump shut the government down and made building a wall the major political issue of the day. Hmmmmm!
Might this just be political theater to rile up his base while stoking fear and division for the 2020 presidential campaign?
You decide.
Frank Ferrone
El Cajon
Build a wall and crime will fall? Let's stop kidding ourselves. There will be no comprehensive immigration reform as long as Trump is president.
He does not want to fix immigration or DACA. If that were to happen, he would lose his single most important issue for energizing his "base." He would then own the results and would have to defend how his plan had not solved all of the problems that were caused by previous administrations. He has never accepted responsibility for anything; he is not changing anytime soon. Trump can only survive in chaos.
Jim Southerland
Point Loma
Don’t let shutdowns become a bargaining chip
President Trump’s wall; $1.375 billion for 55 miles. Consider this another way. That price is $4,735 per foot and for a small percentage of the currently unfenced portion of border.
We now know that shutting down the government is the real national emergency.
And if Trump actually does sign this compromise bill he will no doubt use the same tactic again and again.
Ron Carrico
Mission Hills
As if the thought that Mexico would pay for Trump’s wall wasn’t nonsensical enough, Sen. Ted Cruz (R. Texas) has reached a new level of absurdity by claiming El Chapo should pay for the wall.
Here’s a better idea; Senator Cruz can go to the offices of the Sinaloa Cartel and personally attempt to collect the money from them.
Joseph S. Carmellino
Ocean Beach
The National Emergencies Act does not specify any particular circumstances that must be satisfied before a president can invoke its extraordinary powers.  The law does not require the President to define or explain the basis for a National Emergency.  The United States Supreme Court will uphold his discretionary authority as they approved the Administration’s authority to limit immigration. In addition, the Court will be unwilling to put itself in the middle of a dispute between the Executive and Legislative branches.  Especially since the law provides Congress a remedy.  A joint resolution of Congress could overturn the resolution.  Assuming it even passes Senate, it would be vetoed by the President.  Therefore, giving the Supreme Court an ignoble way out.
T. R. Huntley
Vista
Letters and commentary policy
The U-T welcomes and encourages community dialogue on important public matters. Please visit this page for more details on our letters and commentaries policy. You can email letters@sduniontribune.com or leave a comment below.
Follow @UTLetters on Twitter and UTOpinion on Facebook.
