View this email in your browser
One year ago today, a heartsick nation reeled at the terrible news breaking out of Parkland, Florida: An active shooter inside one of the largest high schools in the state. Fourteen students killed. Three teachers dead. Fourteen others wounded.
Though it was certainly not the first mass school shooting the country had suffered, the immediacy of it was shocking: on social media, students inside the building posted pictures of blood-slicked floors and classroom equipment shattered by bullets. Text messages expressed their abject terror — and bade farewell to loved ones. And then, when the shooting had stopped, video images captured scenes of traumatized students filing out of the building, hands on their heads, as authorities tried to lock down what had started the day as just another high school and ended the day as a crime scene.
Today, as we mark that tragic anniversary, The 74 looks back at the profound effects of the mass shooting at Marjory Stoneman Douglas High School on the students, the state and the nation. Mark Keierleber, who spent the remainder of 2018 tracking school shootings, takes stock of how the educational and the media landscapes have changed as a result.
Plus, a new push to teach the Bible in the nation’s public schools, a Texas “teach-in” on detained immigrant children and an analysis of why Illinois’s ESSA goals just won’t work, today at The 74.
School Safety
6 THINGS WE’VE LEARNED SINCE THE PARKLAND SHOOTING ONE YEAR AGO: Valentine’s Day is typically a celebration of love, but the holiday in 2018 has gone down in history as a moment of hate , national mourning — and resilience. That afternoon in Parkland, Florida, a gunman opened fire at Marjory Stoneman Douglas High School, killing 14 students and three adults. Like other mass school shootings — from Columbine to Sandy Hook — the tragedy had immediate ramifications, both locally and nationally.
From new gun laws to a surge in spending on school security, Mark Keierleber has six big lessons we’ve learned about student safety, school security and resilience in the year since the tragedy.
Today we also look back at some of the most shared articles about student safety and school security that we've published since Parkland:
Inside the $3 Billion School Security Industry: Companies market sophisticated technology to ‘harden’ campuses, but will it make us safe ?
 
Security vs. Privacy: As schools comb social media for potential threats, has mass shooting anxiety turned administrators into the ‘Internet Police’ ?
 
A Criminologist Builds a Shooting Database: 74 Interview — Criminologist Nadine Connell on why she’s building a 30-year database of school shootings (and what hidden lessons may be found in the stats)
 
Lessons From Our Year Tracking School Shootings: Students more likely to be hit by lightning than shot in class , yet fear of mass violence is driving policy
 
A Parkland Teacher's Perspective: Ivy Schamis was teaching about the Holocaust when shots rang out at Parkland, killing two of her students. Now the lessons are deeply personal
 
A New HBO Documentary: A few days ahead of the Thursday anniversary, Mark Keierleber interviews both the Parkland teacher and the filmmaker behind a new HBO documentary on the school shooting, its aftermath  and the musical that ‘must go on ’
Church & State
BIOLOGY, BAND … AND THE BIBLE?: President Donald Trump has seldom waded into education debates, so it certainly caught the public’s eye when he tweeted late last month about an apparent rise in Bible literacy classes in public schools . They’re being pushed by religious liberty groups who say knowledge of the Bible is key to understanding history, literature and the broader culture. But such classes can run afoul of constitutional rules regarding the separation of church and state, and experts say it’s more appropriate to teach the Bible as part of a comparative religion or general literature course. Carolyn Phenicie reports.
Immigration
EDUCATORS TO STAGE TEXAS “TEACH-IN” TO REBUKE TRUMP ON IMMIGRANT YOUTH DETENTION: When President Donald Trump honored Teacher of the Year Mandy Manning at the White House last year, she gave him a stack of letters from her immigrant students who wrote about their experiences coming to America. This weekend, Manning will once again use her platform to defend immigrant children and spotlight one of Trump’s most controversial policies: child detention. On Sunday, Manning and educators from across the country — many of them state teachers of the year — plan to stage a “teach-in” in El Paso, Texas, to push the government to end the lengthy detention of children in shelters . The shelters became a flashpoint last year when a zero-tolerance policy separated undocumented children from their parents. Although a court ordered the Trump administration to reunite children with their families, the issue is far from over. By the end of 2018, the number of children in the shelters had reached historic levels . Mark Keierleber reports.
Analysis
WHY ILLINOIS’S ESSA GOALS WON’T WORK: The federal Every Student Succeeds Act requires state education agencies to set goals for student outcomes. In Illinois, the Board of Education has set a goal of having 90 percent of students achieve proficiency on state standardized tests . This is extremely ambitious, writes contributor Elliot Regenstein, but it ignores one of the main lessons of the No Child Left Behind era: Don’t set goals that schools have no chance of meeting, because educators will not take them seriously. The board’s goals also focus solely on proficiency, not taking student growth into account. He explains how Illinois can do better — and how other states can learn from its example .
Innovation
THE FUTURE OF SCHOOL GOVERNANCE — HOW DO YOU BUILD OVERSIGHT FOR AN INNOVATIVE SYSTEM?: A local public education system built for personalization and rapid adjustment to workforce demands must be open to innovation and make full use of learning opportunities outside of conventional schools. But, warns contributor Paul Hill, that system cannot be so atomized, chaotic or dominated by irresponsible providers that families are ultimately unable to make informed choices for their children . Families, he argues, need a comprehensible set of options and information about likely results for students, and communities need options that prepare young people for jobs that are likely to exist. Still, this need for some degree of order and process must not drive out innovation and responsiveness to change. Students must be free to pursue — and providers free to offer — learning experiences that community leaders might not understand or prefer . In today's essay, Hill takes the long view on how to balance these essential, conflicting needs.
Union Report
A TALE OF 2 TEACHER STRIKES: A month after Los Angeles teachers went on strike, teachers in Oakland may walk off the job Monday . Naturally, comparisons are inevitable, even though one district is the nation’s second-largest — and a media capital, at that — and the other is less than one-tenth the size, and not even the largest district in its immediate area. Mike Antonucci breaks down the potential similarities and differences, from bargaining and messaging to size, scope and leadership .
ICYMI
BIG PICTURE — IS HOMEWORK TOO EASY?: Some districts are banning homework for elementary school students, but a new study says out-of-school assignments should not only remain, but need to become more rigorous . Researchers from the Center for American Progress found that homework assignments from schools around the country largely focus on lower-level skills and not the critical-thinking competencies more associated with the Common Core standards. And parents are noticing. Nearly half of those surveyed said they believe their child’s homework is too easy, failing to challenge the student. 74 Contributor Brendan Lowe takes a closer look at the survey responses and the researchers’ analysis, and considers what steps families and educators can take to ensure that more rigorous work is being sent home .
Copyright © 2019 The Seventy Four, All rights reserved.
Want to change how you receive these emails?
