Porn Shutdown in whole of Europe after Nacho Vidal confirmed HIV positive
Posted on
by Lianne Young
Nacho Vidal has today been confirmed as HIV. The whole of Europe is now on shut down for a month from filming X rated movies. This is protocol when any actor is confirmed HIV well first, second and third generation actors are tested for the disease. The industry is in shock around the world as the world’s top actor “Nacho” was confirmed positive in Barcelona.
First generation actresses on the list are Denise Martin, Cady Doll, Ginenra, Talia Mint, Linda del sol, Gina Ferocuious, Monica Mavi, Rhona Stops.
Nacho has only replied to one reporter from the Spanish press saying “I don’t know where you’ve got the info but it’s in very bad taste. I won’t say anything thanks”.
Industry insiders are on social media spreading the news well Nacho confirms he will release a statement in the coming hours. Europe at present is free from having to use condoms, California in the US is the only place where the law is condom only productions.
Test for HIV on performers currently takes a month and sometimes longer to show up on tests. During this time nervous performers will be held on standstill from performing any X rated movies.
Some speculate that he has had HIV for some time with rumours stating he has known he is HIV positive since 2004 when Porn Wiki Leaks in 2013 released a statement saying “Nacho is not only a closet homosexual but also likes to produce and use only HIV positive men to infect women in the industry, which was the reason for an industry shut down in 2004 which caused 5 people to get the virus. This suggested Nacho should be banned from the USA for good.
In 2018 he was nominated by AVN for Best Foreign sex scene production and in 2013 was given the award of best boy/girl seen. Nacho first got into the industry in 1998 and soon built a reputation as a windman both in front and behind the camera. Only last year he was working on a TV series called Tushy,  First Time Auditions and  Evil Angel.
Feel free to share
