Opinions expressed by Forbes Contributors are their own.
Leadership Strategy I write about Agile management, leadership, innovation & narrative.
Share to facebook
Share to twitter
Share to linkedin
Normally, all leaders, even authoritarians, try to make sure that the trains run on time , or at least that the trains keep running . If government doesn’t function, or workers aren’t paid for doing their jobs, then even the leaders’ most faithful followers risk awakening from their complacency and examining their leaders’ aberrant behavior with brutal scrutiny.
President Trump is now testing the outer limits of that leadership playbook by shutting down a quarter of the government—already the longest shut-down in American history—and threatening to continue it “ for months, even a year ,” if he doesn’t get $5.7 billion funding his 2000-mile wall along the Southern border.
U.S. President Donald Trump Photographer: Carlos Barria/© 2018 Bloomberg Finance LP
© 2018 Bloomberg Finance LP
The shutdown is disrupting the lives of millions of citizens, including the mortgage industry, (which had enough political clout to get relief ) and many of his base, like farmers  (who sadly have not seen respite). While Congress has passed a bill that promises retroactive pay for government employees after the shutdown ends , that is no consolation for the many contractors who have been laid off, or for those parts of the private sector that are negatively affected. Not surprisingly, many government workers have called in sick. Shortfalls in key government functions and hardship stories keep coming to light. Having an air-traffic control system or a food safety system staffed by unpaid workers raises obvious questions. From a “White House in chaos” we have passed to “a nation in chaos.”
Demonstrators against the government shutdown Photo: Scott Eisen/© 2019 Bloomberg Finance LP
© 2019 Bloomberg Finance LP
As polls show that Americans blame Trump and GOP much more than Democrats for the shutdown, pundits increasingly score a “loss” for Trump, with no way out.
Yet Trump and many of his loyal followers see the ongoing government shutdown as a necessary step, and even a “win,” for his agenda of disrupting government and dis-empowering elites.
Trump As An Amusing Buffoon
Given the strange history of the shutdown to date (see America’s Longest Government Shutdown: How We Got Here ), it is common for late-night comedians like Stephen Colbert to ridicule Trump’s behavior and accuse him of acting like a spoiled child who is not getting his way.
“Predictably," said the Washington Post , "House Speaker Pelosi and Senate Minority Leader Schumer responded to Trump by slinging familiar insults at the president, looking, as many pointed out, like disappointed parents as they accused Trump of spreading ‘misinformation’ and governing by ‘temper tantrum.’”
Chuck Schumer, and Nancy Pelosi, Photographer: Andrew Harrer/ © 2018 Bloomberg Finance LP
© 2018 Bloomberg Finance LP
Yet to see Trump as a harmless toddler or his misbehavior as a mere temper tantrum is to misjudge this cunning politician whose behavior has already undermined fundamental principles of the U.S. constitution.
As David Leonhardt has noted in the New York Times:
Trump has repeatedly put his own interests above those of the country. He has used the presidency to promote his businesses. He has accepted financial gifts from foreign countries. He has lied to the American people about his relationship with a hostile foreign government. He has tolerated cabinet officials who use their position to enrich themselves.
To shield himself from accountability ... he has set out to undermine the American system of checks and balances . He has called for the prosecution of his political enemies and the protection of his allies. He has attempted to obstruct justice . He has tried to shake the public’s confidence in one democratic institution after another, including the press, federal law enforcement and the federal judiciary.
In evaluating the situation, using simple linear logic to count how much of the wall gets funded or constructed misconstrues the multiple dimensions of the situation. Trump has already re-established “the wall”—and all that it represents—at the center of the nation’s political debate . Continuing the fight for "the wall" enables Trump to convince his base that he is on their side and disguise the fact that his policies have exactly the opposite effect.
How The Wall Became More Than A Wall
Some commentators suggest that the impasse over the government budget could be solved if alternative terms could be used, such as a “barrier,” “fence,” or “steel slats;” or if the two parties could sit down and  discuss what exactly made sense to be done in each of the very different geographies along the 2000-mile border (in some places, mountains or rivers obviate the need for a wall); or if the two sides could split the difference in terms of money; or if the debate was broadened to cover wider immigration issues.
These obvious pragmatic suggestions overlook the fact that Trump’s wall has become more than a physical barrier, in the same way that a flag becomes more than a piece of cloth. The debate isn’t whether to call it "a wall." Nor is it just about money. To his base, Trump’s wall has become a potent mythical symbol of his hardline position on immigration and his genius as a strongman who can solve problems that had stumped previous political leaders. For his followers, Trump’s “wall” is not just a physical thing: it has become a beacon, a potent legend in itself, even the holy grail of Trump’s presidency, for whose accomplishment, no sacrifice can be too great.
For Trump himself, the wall is a political lever to activate his base. If it were to be funded or built, it would be a setback for Trump because he would cease to have that lever.
The Meaning Of The Wall
How did the wall become more than a wall? Donald Trump was elected as U.S. president in 2016 in part on the basis of the myth that many of America’s problems are caused by massive illegal immigration, which can be solved by building “a big, beautiful, 2000-mile concrete wall along the Southern border,” to be paid for by Mexico. The rationale? Illegal Mexicans, who are swarming through the Southern border, are criminals, rapists, murderers or terrorists. They are bringing with them drugs and crime and taking away jobs from honest hard-working Americans. Constructing a big concrete wall would solve these problems in one stroke and restore the economic prospects of America’s middle class, by giving jobs to Americans, that had been lost to Mexicans.
Better yet, the wall would cost nothing: endless chants at Trump’s rallies recited the claim that Mexico would pay for the wall— a claim that was made at least 212 times during the presidential campaign, and dozens of times since, as well as confirmed by Trump’s own website which explicitly stated that Mexico would pay $5-10 billion for the wall.
The Fantasy Of Trump As A Powerful Leader
Ostensibly the government shutdown is about whether the U.S. government should pay for a wall along the Southern border. But more fundamentally the discussion is about Trump’s image as a leader and the risk that Trump’s inability to obtain funding for the wall would make him “ look foolish” to his base .
That in turn would put in question some of the other claims that Trump has made for himself. He has proclaimed himself “extraordinarily intelligent” with “a giant brain.” He “knows more about defense than the generals.” He claims to be a brilliant businessman whose companies somehow suffered multiple bankruptcies.
He asserts prowess as a master deal maker, yet he has been unable to make a deal with Democrats. On Thursday, we learned that the failure of negotiations was because his democratically elected opponents in the exercise of their constitutional functions, House Speaker Pelosi and Senate Minority Leader Schumer, are “ not as honorabl e” as the vicious autocrats of China.
While “walking away from the table” was one of Trump’s signature tactics in his role as a businessman, it has proved to be a drawback in a governmental setting where it undermines the very enterprise—government—for whose functioning Trump is ultimately responsible.
On Thursday, we also learned that Trump is better informed than historians in claiming falsely that “wheels are older than walls.” We also discovered that Trump has extraordinary legal powers and could get the funds from elsewhere in the government if and when he wants to.
At bottom, the problem for Trump is that puncturing the fantasy of the border wall also risks puncturing the fantasy of Trump as an all-powerful leader.
The Wall Is A Cornerstone Of Trump’s Authoritarian Agenda
Trump has now accumulated over 7,000 false or misleading statements since becoming president. Yet in telling so many falsehoods, Trump is not, as Harry G. Frankfurt , a professor emeritus of philosophy at Princeton University explains, merely a habitual liar (someone who knows he is telling untruths) or even a b-llsh-tter, (who doesn’t care whether what he says is true or not).
According to Frankfurt, Trump is something more dangerous. He is a practitioner of authoritarian propaganda, whereby a leader concocts fictions that offer a narrative explaining why the problems that trouble whole groups of people have a simple origin and an even simpler solution. The explanation of the problems is inevitably that some other group or groups, in conspiracy with a corrupt elite, are responsible for them. The solution is even simpler—namely, follow the leader who will eliminate the elites and the other groups. The constant repetition of the fiction is key to getting it accepted. Constant lying is a feature, not a bug.
In the fictitious world concocted by Trump, the repeatedly false claims —the security crisis at the border, illegal border crossings that are at an all-time high, the Democrats who are uninterested in border security, the press who are hiding the crisis and making up lies about the president—are immune to disproof by presentation of the actual facts.
The lovely comfort offered by Trump’s fictions portrays a world that is too seductive to be undermined by reality. To Trump’s base, the beautiful legend of “the wall” is, and remains, more attractive than the real world.
In this way, “the wall” has become a code-name for the racist, anti-immigrant isolationist policies of Trump’s presidency. It is in this sense that Nancy Pelosi is right to say that “the wall,” in providing a symbol of such toxic policies, is “ an immorality ."
The Reality On The Southern Border
Trump's case for "the wall" also overlooks key facets of the actual situation:
Arrests for illegal immigration are at a 46-year low ;
There is no significant evidence of terrorists or drugs entering illegally through the Southern border. Most of the drugs being brought into the country come through legal points of entry.
It's true that there is an increase in the number of families legally seeking legal asylum, which has led to a humanitarian crisis that is in part caused by the Trump administration’s own policies aimed at deterring legal immigration.
The lack of good jobs and the lost economic prospects of America’s middle class are unrelated to immigration or the Southern border and are in part the consequences of the pro-big-business tax-cuts-for-the-rich economic policies that Trump himself continues to pursue.
Building a giant wall along the Southern border wall would thus be costly and ineffective but it serves Trump as a distraction from the real issues at hand.
Any justification for “the wall” along Southern border  on the basis of a “security crisis” is further undermined by the positive dimensions of immigration.
Immigrants represent about 13% of the U.S. overall population but 27.5 % of America’s entrepreneurs
40% of Fortune 500 firms had at least one founder who either immigrated to the U.S. or was the child of immigrants
America is a nation of immigrants that has traditionally welcomed immigrants, most famously as written on the Status of Liberty.
Trump’s Stance Of ‘No Negotiation’
In a sign of growing unease about the partial government shutdown, some Senate Republicans came off the sidelines last week to try to work out a deal to reopen the government while Congress worked toward a broader immigration reform, linking funding for the wall with to protection for some undocumented immigrants and other migrants.
But before those negotiations could get going, Trump’s team let it be known that the president would not back such a deal. The talks collapsed. “It is time for President Trump to use emergency powers to fund the construction of a border wall or barrier,” sighed Senator Graham on Thursday. Yet use of those emergency powers, or cannibalizing other budgets, is sure to raise both a political outcry and a court challenge.
To objective observers, it's hard to see any outcome from the current impasse that would not make Trump look weak or foolish. Yet objective observers are not the audience to whom Trump’s convolutions are directed. They are aimed at his adoring base. For them, continuing the fight counts as a win. Any failure is attributed to “the enemy:” Democrats, the media and the rest of the hypocritical elite.
Even if Trump eventually fails to secure funding for his wall, in the eyes of his base, he will have nobly fought on their behalf. In their eyes, that in itself is a win and propels them to go on supporting him.
Trump ‘s ‘Crisis Of The Soul’
Among the few unexpectedly correct statements in President Trump’s fact-challenged address to the nation from the Oval Office on January 8 was his declaration that the nation is facing “a crisis of the heart and a crisis of the soul.” A heart and a soul is precisely what Trump is lacking.
Trump shows remarkably little interest in the negative consequences of shutting down the government for an extended period, leaving so many employees and contractors without pay, while also expecting many of them to go on working. His lack of empathy ties in with his behavior on his few visits to disaster areas, which have involved such strange actions as throwing paper towels to Puerto Ricans. Trump's behavior displays a callousness and shamelessness never before seen in any federal official, let alone an American president. Heart and soul are precisely what Trump is not offering: instead he is offering toxic authoritarian fictions.
“Totalitarian movements,” wrote Hannah Arendt in her classic book, The Origins of Totalitarianism , “conjure up a lying world of consistency which is more adequate to the needs of the human mind than reality itself; in which, through sheer imagination, uprooted masses can feel at home and are spared the never-ending shocks which real life and real experiences deal to human beings and their expectations. The force possessed by totalitarian propaganda… lies in its ability to shut the masses off from the real world.”
“The chief disability of totalitarian propaganda is that it cannot fulfill the longing of the masses for a completely consistent, comprehensible, and predictable world without seriously conflicting with common sense."
For a time, under the sway of authoritarian propaganda, common sense can be held at bay from intruding into the cocoon of reassuring fiction. Yet the deliberate distortion of reality is also the cause of propaganda’s inevitable downfall. It is the inexorable and brutal collision with reality that eventually ruins the cocoon. It’s not a matter of whether. It’s only a question of when.
 And read also:
