Email
LAS VEGAS — Watching the Maple Leafs play hockey isn’t what Tyler Ennis necessarily signed up for last summer.
The energetic forward knew, considering the forward depth in Toronto, that it was a possibility when he put his signature on a one-year contract with the Leafs in July.
And so it is that Ennis remains on the outside, fully recovered from a broken ankle but playing the role of healthy scratch.
Ennis sat for a third consecutive game on Thursday night when the Leafs visited the Vegas Golden Knights. Of course, Ennis wants to be in the lineup.
There’s no hint of frustration, however, especially after he had a difficult season with the Minnesota Wild in 2017-18 and was bought out.
For the 29-year-old Ennis, a sense of rejuvenation remains.
“Absolutely,” Ennis said after taking part in the Leafs’ optional morning skate on Thursday. “I feel it every morning when I come to the rink.
“It’s just a fun … I’m enjoying playing hockey. I’m enjoying coming to the rink, it’s a great group and it’s fun to come to the rink and work hard. And we do work hard.
“That’s the fun thing about this group. I think we enjoy the work. We enjoy the practice, we enjoy being around each other. And we have been enjoying the grind.”
Ennis, in total, has not played in the past 21 games. He was hurt on Dec. 22 in a game against the New York Rangers.
Prior to being injured, Ennis brought a spark to the fourth line. In 33 games, he has 11 points (seven goals and four assists).
Ennis realizes his position could change at the drop of a puck.
“Especially this time of year, there is wear and tear on every team,” Ennis said. “My mindset is the same as every guy’s mindset on this team. Continue to work hard, on the ice, off the ice, have a good attitude, be positive.”
IDLE IGOR
As Leafs coach Mike Babcock tries to come to a final conclusion as to how to use his six defencemen as far as pairings go — and keeping in mind there will be further change if general manager Kyle Dubas adds another blue-line piece before the NHL trade deadline on Feb. 25 — Igor Ozhiganov continues to sit by, ready to resume his role on the third pair.
Barring injury to one of the Leafs’ top six, don’t count on it happening.
It’s not the best situation for Ozhiganov, and Babcock knows it. The 26-year-old Russian has not played in the past eight games, including Thursday night, coinciding with the acquisition of Jake Muzzin from the Los Angeles Kings.
“I think there is always concern (that Ozhiganov is not playing), what’s the option?” Babcock said. “It’s the NHL. Those (Leafs) players expect us to play the best players every night, and they also expect you to play who is playing his best in that game. That’s the great thing about the NHL, it’s the best of the best and the best play.”
The Leafs think Ozhiganov is better off practising with them than he would be playing for the Toronto Marlies. Ozhiganov would not require waivers to be sent down; the other non-playing Leafs defenceman, Justin Holl, would need waivers, and the Leafs have no interest in taking the risk of losing the right-hand shooting Holl.
“That’s not a priority for us right now,” Babcock said of the Marlies option for Ozhiganov. “If it has to be a priority, we can make it one. We think his opportunity here is a good one.
“It’s a good one just in conditioning alone. Lots of times when you’re not playing, your conditioning gets way better just because of the fact you’re doing so much skating.”
In 42 games this season, Ozhiganov has three goals and four assists. He will be a restricted free agent this summer after signing a one-year pact with the Leafs last May.
TEAM-BUILDING EXPERIENCE
Babcock is fine with how well the Golden Knights have fared through their first two seasons in the NHL, first in going to the Stanley Cup final last spring when the Washington Capitals emerged victorious, and now, in position to again secure a playoff spot.
“There is a way better deal for the expansion team,” Babcock said. “I thought (Vegas general manager) George McPhee did an outstanding job of cornering the market.
“We all have players you don’t really know how good they are going to be, and you don’t know until they are given the opportunity. Two years later when you look back, you say ‘Geez, I wish I would have kept that guy.’
“Hindsight is a wonderful thing, but (Vegas is) set up good now. That’s the idea. You are trying to create a partner in the league, not someone to step all over. They did a good job. They had a real good year, and now they are like the rest of us — trying to do it again.”
The Leafs don’t miss the player they lost in the Vegas expansion draft, forward Brendan Leipsic.
Leipsic is now with the Kings after the Golden Knights traded him to the Vancouver Canucks last season.
In June 2021, Seattle will follow the same expansion-draft rules as Vegas. The to-be-named Seattle club will start play in the NHL in 2021-22.
