On Friday, when MSK Prasad and his colleagues sit down to pick the T20 and ODI squads for the home series against Australia, they have a few things to debate.
| TNN | Feb 15, 2019, 08:46 IST
Highlights
India will host Australia for two T20Is and five ODIs. The tour begins with the first T20I on Feb 24.
The selectors will have to decide whether to carry three wicketkeeper-batsmen (Dhoni, Pant, Karthik) in the squad of 15.
Vijay Shankar could find an upper hand over Khaleel Ahmed simply owning to better temperament.
(AFP Photo)
MUMBAI: On Friday, when MSK Prasad and his colleagues sit down to pick the T20 and ODI squads for the home series against Australia, they have a few things to debate. Most importantly, they will have to decide whether India can carry three wicketkeeper-batsmen in the squad of 15 or do away with either MS Dhoni or Dinesh Karthik to accommodate Rishabh Pant .
TOI looks at the choices.
Dhoni vs Karthik vs Pant: The options in front of Prasad & Co. are – either pick all three, or continue with Dhoni and Karthik, or drop one of them to pick Pant.
At 33 going on 34, Karthik made his India debut in 2004 – ahead of Dhoni – and has played 91 ODIs (77 innings) at an average of 31.04. The Tamil Nadu batsman, in fact, made a return to One-day cricket three years after an unsuccessful Asia Cup stint in 2014, thanks to an impressive run in the domestic circuit.
“Karthik’s numbers suggest that he’s been a bits and pieces player. Numbers don’t really speak for him. The present bunch of selectors – who got appointed after the CoA were appointed by the Supreme Court – showed faith in him. Now again, there are numbers to take note of,” say those eyeing the team from close quarters.
Pant, on the other hand, is 21, cruising away at every given opportunity that has come his way.
“Pant was expected to play the ODI series in Australia. Whose idea was it to drop him? The selectors said he needs rest. And then what did they do? Pack him off to play India ‘A’. Where was the rest then? Did the selectors have a plan or not?” asked sources.
Vijay Shankar vs Khaleel Ahmed : Both are talented. But, with selectors looking to pick one among the two, Shankar could find an upper hand over Ahmed simply owning to better temperament.
“He has the nerve for big occasions. A smart thinker. Khaleel has shown promise but he may have to wait. Right now, we believe, it has to be Shankar,” say sources.
Possible inclusions: Rohit Sharma, Shikhar Dhawan, Virat Kohli, Ambati Rayudu (as optional opener), Shubhman Gill (if selectors pick either Karthik or Pant), MS Dhoni, Kedar Jadhav, Hardik Pandya, Kuldeep Yadav, Yuzuvendra Chahal, Bhuvneshwar Kumar, Jasprit Bumrah, Mohammed Shami
