Tweet It
Post Views: 9,213
A reader has written us to point out that the Somali website Somalispot posted information last week suggesting Omar’s involvement in marriage and immigration fraud. The post notes that Omar married Ahmed Hirsi in 2002. Hirsi is the father of Omar’s three children. Omar is depicted with Hirsi and their children on Omar’s campaign website.
The post further notes that Omar married her brother Ahmed Nur Said Elmi in 2009, implying that the latter marriage assisted his entry into the United States. Her brother was a British citizen. “As soon as Ilhan Omar married him,” the post continues, “he started university at her [a]lma mater North Dakota State University where he graduated in 2012. Shortly thereafter, he moved to Minneapolis where he was living in a public housing complex and was later evicted. He then returned to the United Kingdom where he now lives.”
In 2017, several months after Omar’s marriage history briefly created a national news item, Omar quietly petitioned the family court for a default divorce, claiming she could not locate Elmi.
Newly uncovered evidence — exclusively published below — adds another allegation: Ilhan Omar has since signed off on apparent falsehoods, under penalty of perjury, during her 2017 divorce from the man in question: Ahmed Nur Said Elmi.
New Evidence, New Allegations
Minnesota law deems court records of divorce proceedings to be available to the public. In 2017, several months after Omar’s marriage history briefly created a national news item, Omar quietly petitioned the family court for a default divorce, claiming she could not locate Elmi.
The above document depicts Omar, under penalty of perjury, attesting to the court that she has not had contact with her legal husband since June 2011.
To those familiar with the 2016 coverage of this story, this claim should strike as a jaw-dropper. (Ed. note: scroll down below for a summary of the Ilhan Omar backstory.)
To reference just one example, the three immediately following photos were pivotal elements of the 2016 coverage. These pictures first appeared on Ilhan Omar’s personal Instagram account in 2014 (her username at the time was “hameey”), and depict Ilhan visiting Ahmed Nur Said Elmi in London that year.
In contrast to Omar’s attestation of zero contact since 2011, two of Omar’s three self-published photos here actually appear to show physical contact some three years later:
There are many other examples of consistent social media communication — comments like — between the two since June 2011.
When confronted with the above pictures in 2016, UK resident Ahmed N. Elmi admitted to a reporter that he was indeed the scarved man in the three pictures. However, he also claimed to not know the name of the woman in the colorful head covering adjacent to him, and that she certainly was not his legal wife. He then gave the reporter a different birthdate for himself than the April 4, 1985, birthdate given for Ahmed Nur Said Elmi in Omar’s divorce petition.
In short, he claimed to simply be a different Ahmed N. Elmi, who coincidentally happened to get photographed with Ilhan Omar at a London event.
As with Ilhan’s self-published photos, this newly discovered post from Elmi’s confirmed Instagram account contradicts his claim:
On October 20, 2013, Elmi posted the above photos of himself in the hospital following minor surgery.
Clearly, his hospital intake bracelet identifies his date of birth to be April 4, 1985.
While other men named Ahmed Elmi have lived in the U.S. and London, there simply are no records to be found of another one sharing the exact birthdate as the Ahmed Nur Said Elmi whom Ilhan Omar divorced. Of course, this Ahmed Elmi has also been photographed with Ilhan Omar, and regularly communicated with her on social media.
Piling on, note that a second known Instagram account belonging to Ilhan Omar, “ilhanmn,” commented on the above post in 2013.
Her comment indicates that she knew how to reach Elmi by phone years after June 2011, another strike against her sworn claims.
More New Evidence Suggests a Troubling Motive
Why might Omar apparently risk her political career and serious legal exposure by attesting to that easily challenged “June 2011” claim? Could it credibly be faulted to an honest, if severe, mistake?
Another document from Omar’s 2017 divorce proceedings suggests a more compelling, if speculative, motivation:
The above document contains extraordinary information.
First, Ilhan attests that there are no children born “of” her marriage to Ahmed Elmi, but that one of her children was born “during” that marriage. A yellow box notes that the document “has been updated since signed,” and an initialed note contains the update:
The Respondent [Ahmed Nur Said Elmi] has not signed a declaration of non-paternity as the Petitioner [Ilhan Omar] has had no contact with him since before the child was conceived.
In 2016, Ilhan told the press that her 2009 marriage to Ahmed Elmi was essentially a two-year hiatus from her relationship with Ahmed Hirsi, the legal father of all three of her children. She claimed to have separated from Hirsi, then met and married Elmi, a relationship which failed permanently sometime around June 2011, and then rekindled with Hirsi and had a third child.
Ilhan is filing for default divorce here. I cannot imagine that a judge would grant a divorce without Elmi even being served if the paternity of a minor child was in question.
On this point, one last bit of evidence seems to be a Pandora’s Box:
The above Instagram post appeared on Ahmed Nur Said Elmi’s account on June 12, 2012.
That’s Elmi himself, holding baby Ilwad at the hospital. She was born the day before to his legal wife, Ilhan Omar. Who attested in court that she has had zero contact with Ahmed Elmi since before Ilwad was conceived, let alone born.
The silver lining for Elmi here is that he still likely has little reason to fear a process server greeting him in London with a paternity test.
Because he clearly calls his wife’s child … a niece?
For Rep. Ilhan Omar, everything about this Instagram post is a Code Red, and she’s up for election in six days. PJ Media has emailed her campaign seeking comment multiple times since August 3rd but has not yet received a response.
In 2016, two Minnesota journalists — Scott Johnson of Powerline and Preya Samsundar of AlphaNewsMN — researched an anonymous tip about Ilhan Omar. The tipster had presented evidence that Omar married her brother in 2009, and was still legally his wife as of 2016. The tipster had also asserted that Omar may have done it to help her brother commit immigration fraud. Further, the tipster had noted that Omar has been “culturally” married to, and living with, a second man since 2002 — the father of her three children.
Simple online searches of public civil records and social media immediately proved parts of the story to be true.
Samsundar discovered additional compelling evidence and even managed to get in touch with the apparent husband/brother, who currently lives in London. He proceeded to talk himself into a pickle trying to answer Samsundar’s questions.
For doing their jobs admirably, Johnson and Samsundar were subsequently labeled “Islamophobes” and bigots. Omar’s own representatives lashed out with such comments.
The Minneapolis Star-Tribune and “alternative weekly” City Pages — though they certainly “followed up” on the story — offered minimal effort beyond publishing official comments from Omar’s campaign. After first blaming anti-Muslim bigotry, Omar changed tactics by offering an eyebrow-raising statement that left specific evidence and accusations unaddressed.
It worked. Virtually all media outlets that covered the allegations seemed content with Omar’s official statement. She was soon sworn in — the first Muslim Somali to be elected to a U.S. state legislature. That achievement landed her the cover of Time.
Now Omar is pursuing an open federal seat, and a growing list of Democrats, including Minnesota Governor Mark Dayton (D), have endorsed this self-described “intersectional feminist.” The district party officially endorsed Omar at a hastily assembled convention; she took 68% of the delegates’ votes.
Perhaps most pivotally, Omar received a timely boost from the entertainment industry in the weeks and months before Ellison even announced he would not run again.
Time for Ilhan, a documentary about Omar’s 2016 election win, just happened to hit the local festival circuit in April. Per the Hollywood Reporter’s fawning review, the film blesses Omar and her identity in a manner reminiscent of the introduction given a certain Illinois state senator in the George W. Bush era:
At the beginning of Norah Shapiro’s documentary about Ilhan Omar’s political run we’re informed that no one of Somali descent has ever been elected to legislative office in the United States. By the end of this inspiring film, that fact has (spoiler alert) been movingly put to rest. Time for Ilhan feels like manna from heaven for liberals and progressives who have been in a state of despair since the last presidential election.
…
As the campaign grinds on, an exhausted Ilhan sighs, “It’s a lot, trying to change the world.”
In late May, Ilhan stunned for a few photogenic seconds in a new music video celebrating progressive feminism from pop band Maroon 5. Ellen Degeneres was featured too, and Jennifer Lopez, and Sarah Silverman.
Just a week later — and just hours before the filing deadline for the MN CD-5 ballot — Keith Ellison announced he would leave Congress to run for MN attorney general. Sudden celebrity Ilhan Omar soon arrived and filed.
Ellison has since refused to endorse a candidate for the seat he is vacating. And good luck finding a local Democratic insider willing to claim the party attempted to clear a path for her. However, when several other Democrats showed up on deadline day to file, that aforementioned “hastily assembled” district endorsement convention was soon announced. Oddly, it was scheduled for Fathers’ Day, when most of America has other commitments. Ilhan said nothing of note about it, but other candidates complained about the timing and questioned the need for an endorsement convention at all. Notably, the endorsement convention delegates had all been chosen when Ellison was still the expected candidate.
Such media/Democratic symbiosis keeps burning the modern Left — it’s “how they got Trump.” It’s easy to understand the disillusioned Midwest former Obama voters, and the rage against “fake news,” amidst such failure.
In this instance, Minnesota’s current governor and 25-plus Democratic elected officials have endorsed a candidate seemingly without bothering to view her publicly available court records from just the past year.
President Donald Trump portrays the Democrats as lawless, and their identity-based immigration and security platform as juvenile sentimentality. As November approaches, Trump couldn’t possibly find better foils to make those points than Ilhan Omar and the Democrat/media alliance that shepherded her to prominence.
 
 
Ilhan Omar Arrested in 2013 For Trespassing, Booked At Hennepin County Jail
State Rep. Ilhan Omar was arrested in 2013 for trespassing and booked at Hennepin County Jail “to prevent further criminal conduct,” according to a newly uncovered police report.
The incident took place on January 18, 2013 following an event at the Minneapolis Convention Center featuring former Somali President Hassan Sheikh Mohamud. The Somali president was set to stay the night at the Hotel Ivy, causing large groups of Somalis to follow the presidential convoy to the hotel, including Omar.
According to the police report, hotel staff requested police assistance in clearing the lobby, saying that anyone without a hotel room key was not welcome on the premises and needed to leave immediately. The officer handling the incident said the majority of people who were asked to leave were compliant. However, Omar, when approached, was “argumentative” and refused to leave.
“As she stood her ground and refused to leave I took hold of her left elbow to escort her from the lobby. Omar then pulled away from me stating, ‘Don’t put your hands on me!’ Others in her group complied and began walking toward the front entry/exit door as I ordered and I managed to coax Omar out with them,” the police report reads.
Ten minutes after the original encounter, the officer reports finding Omar seated in a different area of the lobby. According to the officer’s account, Omar “remained defiant” as he informed her that she would be arrested for trespassing if she didn’t leave.
Since she refused to comply with orders, the officer arrested Omar. The officer reached for Omar’s left arm to get her to stand so she could be handcuffed, but she pulled away. The officer handcuffed her while she stayed seated in the hotel lobby chair.
“Omar was booked at [Hennepin County Jail] as I felt it was likely that she would fail to respond to a citation and she also demonstrated that she was going to continue her criminal behavior,” the officer wrote.
View the police report below:
