Share on Facebook Share on Twitter
The bipartisan homeland security spending bill released early Thursday pushes back on aspects of President Donald Trump’s immigration crackdown — even while providing $1.4 billion for border barriers and nearly 5,000 additional beds to detain undocumented immigrants.
Tucked into the 1,159-page bill are provisions that limit Trump’s ability to round up undocumented immigrants and that increase oversight of the officers who carry out those sweeps. On the border, restrictions on barrier construction will bar the administration from erecting fences on several large properties in South Texas, including a butterfly sanctuary and a historic Catholic church.
Story Continued Below
The bill ignores the Trump administration’s request to fund 750 additional Border Patrol agents, according to a Democratic summary of the measure and a joint explanatory statement. Additionally, it ignores the administration’s request for 2,000 more Immigration and Customs Enforcement officers.
The legislation amounts to a subtle rejection of Trump’s aggressive enforcement tactics — a needling that reflects the new power dynamic since Democrats took control of the House in January.
Get the latest on employment and immigration, every weekday morning — in your inbox.
Email
Sign Up
By signing up you agree to receive email newsletters or alerts from POLITICO. You can unsubscribe at any time.
The $1.4 billion in border barrier funding is well below the $5.7 billion that Trump sought in negotiations. Beyond that, the legislation limits the type of border barriers the administration may erect to already-deployed designs, which means Trump can’t use any of the border wall prototypes his administration built in the San Diego area.
The president himself has resisted committing to the spending compromise, saying earlier this week that he wasn’t “happy” with the deal. But he also said he didn't expect another government shutdown — which is what would happen if he vetoed the spending package currently moving through Congress.
The bipartisan bill incensed some groups that favor lower levels of immigration, a lobby that enjoys close ties to Trump administration policymakers.
One measure within the bill would prohibit DHS from detaining or deporting a sponsor, potential sponsor, or household member of an unaccompanied minor based on information shared with HHS.
The exemption does not apply to sponsors with felony convictions or charges. Similarly, it does not apply to people linked to businesses that employ minors for less than a legal wage, or that involve prostitution.
Democrats have pushed for such protections to ensure that sponsors who step forward to claim unaccompanied children will not face the threat of arrest and deportation, but immigration hawks say it’s a free pass for undocumented immigrants.
Jessica Vaughan, a policy director with the restrictionist Center for Immigration Studies, said in a tweet Thursday morning that the provision amounted to “de facto sanctuary for anyone near" an unaccompanied minor.
