 Added on February 15, 2019   Images News Netwok
Protests, shutdown continue in Kargil for 6th day
Decrease Font Size Increase Font Size Text Size Print This Page Send by Email
CS-led official delegation meets Kargil leaders
Srinagar, Feb 14: Protests and shutdown continued for the sixth consecutive day in Kargil district of Ladakh division on Thursday to demand rotational divisional headquarters.
Reports said the people from Sankoo sub division, Tai Suru block, Barsoo, TSG block, Minjee, Drass Sub-division, Batalik, Shakar Chiktan, Wakha, Shargole protested while demanding equal representation and share in Ladakh Division.
Meanwhile, the Joint Resistance Committee, which spearheads the agitation to demand rotational headquarters between Leh and Kargil addressed a presser at Islamia School Chowk about the future course of action.
The JRC warned that the people of Kargil are running out of patience and the government will be responsible for any consequences.
Acting CEC LAHDC Kargil Nasir Munshi asked the district officers to abstain from duty and support the cause.
He said the LAHDC Kargil has passed a resolution against the SRO 110 and there will not be any communication in the name of Ladakh Division till the SRO is amended.
The JRC has called for post-Friday protests from Hozia Ilmia Isna Ashirya Kargil, Jamia Masjid Hanfiya and Sofia and the people have been asked to march towards Baroo.
A human chain was also formed from Kabadi Nallah to Imam Khomeni Chowk in which more than 2000 people participated today.
Even though there was no call of protest march, but people took out a protest despite of JRC leadership’s attempts to calm them.
Meanwhile, the state government today held extensive deliberations with the representatives of the Kargil Coordination Committee to end the ongoing stalemate in the district following announcement of a separate Revenue and Administrative Division for Ladakh.
The State government delegation led by Chief Secretary BVR Subrahmanyam included Principal Secretary Home, Shaleen Kabra, Principal Secretary, Planning Development & Monitoring, Rohit Kansal, Commissioner Secretary Revenue Shahid Ananyatullah and Secretary Tourism and Ladakh Affairs, Rigzian Sampheal.
The representatives of the Kargil Coordination Committee present at the meeting included Haji Anayat Ali, Chairman Legislative Council; Feroz Ahmad Khan, Chairman/CEC, LAHDC Kargil; former legislators, Qamar Ali Akhoon, Haji Nisar Ali, Mohammad Bakar Rizvi and Asgar Ali Karbalai, Aga Syed Ahmad Rizvi, Kacho Mohammad Ali and others.
Discussions were held over the demands raised by the Kargil Coordination Committee and it was decided that all the issues would be addressed amicably.
Pertinently, the State government has already constituted a Committee headed by Principal Secretary, Planning Development & Monitoring to determine the location and scope and size of division-level offices, their staffing, size and most importantly, their location in the division.
This Committee will submit its report by 24 February 2019 after interacting with all stakeholders and understanding their needs.
