"When all else fails, you can still play defense."
 A cliche it may be, but it still has merit.
 Century's flat offense was rescued by brilliant defense Thursday night as the Patriots stole a 48-41 road victory in West Region girls basketball at the Mandan High School gym.
 The visiting Patriots built a 32-22 lead in the first half while its offense was still functioning at a satisfactory 46 (12-for-26) percent level. All that disappeared after intermission, though. Century shot 29 percent (6-for-21) over the final 18 minutes.
 What kept CHS afloat was a tough man-to-man that limited Mandan to 25 percent (8-for-32) in the second half and 27 percent (16-for-60), all told.
 Thursday's offensive output was a season low for both teams. Century, which has now won 26 straight games, went into the contest averaging 73.3 points per game. Mandan was scoring at a 69.6 pace.
 The final score more closely resembled the two teams' defensive stats. Century surrendered points at a 42.5 pace through its first 19 games and Mandan yielded 50.7 points per game.
 Another uncharacteristic effort on Century's part was the ballhandling. The Patriots coughed up 22 turnovers, 14 in the second half.
 CHS guard Lilly Keplin, the game's top scorer with 18 points, said defense was simply dominant on Thursday.
 "The big key to that was defense. We played good defense and so did Mandan," she said. "... It's nice to have someone like Lauren (Ware) to correct our (defensive) mistakes."
 Ware, Century's 6-5 junior post, blocked five shots and pulled down 13 rebounds, enabling the Patriots to control the boards 40-36.
 A strong second-half defensive effort gave the Braves a chance to overtake the Patriots, but nobody stepped forth to shake the chilly shooting that enveloped the team.
 Mandan's go-to girls, Megan Zander, Kennedy Harris and Lakyn Darras were 1-for-7, 1-for-6 and 2-for-6, respectively, after the halftime break.
 The Braves made their best run at Century when the Patriot attack fell silent for almost seven minutes in the middle of the second period.
 Mandan took advantage, stinging the visitors 15-2 to trim a 40-24 deficit to 42-39 on a 3-pointer by Harris with 5:07 to play.
 Century quickly answered. Julia Fitterer scored on a drive and Keplin followed up with two free throws and a basket to put the Patriots back in charge 48-39 with 3:33 on the clock. Mandan managed just one field goal the rest of the way.
 "We got some good looks," Mandan coach Abby Thomas said. "We worked hard on the defensive end and sometimes all that effort effects the shooting. We gave it all we've got.
 "They play fantastic defense and didn't give us many good looks."
  The setback was the first for Mandan in 18 games. Their last previous loss was to Century by a 66-57 margin in early December. Century beat Mandan four times last season en route to the state Class A championship.
 Thomas said the inability to handle Century hasn't shaken her team's confidence.
 "We know (the Patriots) are one of the best teams in the state for a reason. They make things difficult, but we know we can play with them. We've shown that every time we step on the court," she said.
"We enjoy playing them. They're a great team, and we're a great team. We embrace that challenge. They bring it every night, and we love that."
 Century took the state's No. 1 ranking into the game. Mandan was rated third behind the Patriots and Devils Lake, both unbeaten.
 Keplin, who scored 14 of her points on 5-for-9 first-half shooting, produced the game's only double-figure offensive effort.
 She said the full-house crowd at Mandan High School definitely had an effect on the game.
 "I thought the crowd got in our heads a little bit, but our coaches kept our confidence high," she said. "We have to make sure we give 100 percent and make sure we don't get overwhelmed by outside forces."
Subscribe to Breaking News
Sign up!
* I understand and agree that registration on or use of this site constitutes agreement to its user agreement and privacy policy.
Love
