Government
Trump To Sign Bill To Avert Shutdown And Will Declare A National Emergency!
There are things in that bill that never should see the light of day. Expanding catch and release for one.
Senate Majority Leader Mitch McConnell announced that President Donald Trump will  sign a compromise  bill to avoid another government shutdown
“I indicated to him I’m going to support the national emergency declaration,” McConnell added.
Many Republicans and conservatives have said  they are opposed  to a national emergency declaration
Advertisement
Sen. Mitch McConnell has confirmed that President Trump will sign the border wall deal that is filled with poison pills and Democratic Party wins and at the same time, will declare a national emergency.
“I had an opportunity to speak with President Trump and he, I would say to all my colleagues, has indicated he’s prepared to sign the bill, he will also be issuing a national emergency declaration at the same time.”
BREAKING: Mitch McConnell said Trump told him he intends to sign the spending bill and declare a national emergency https://t.co/eXtEiCNYUN
— BBC Breaking News (@BBCBreaking) February 14, 2019
Advertisement
President Trump will support a sweeping budget and border compromise and declare a national emergency at the same time, Senate Majority Leader Mitch McConnell (R-Ky.) said Thursday.
The budget compromise would prevent a government shutdown set to start at the end of Friday, but it does not contain the money Trump has demanded for a wall along the U.S.-Mexico border. The emergency declaration could allow Trump to procure wall funding without approval from Congress, though Democrats have promised to challenge the move.
Congress prepared Thursday to pass a sprawling spending bill and border security compromise, but Senate leaders were waiting for a signal that President Trump would support the legislation before bringing it to a vote.
Excerpt via Washington Post
Advertisement
So give the Dems what they want in a totally lopsided so-called compromise (remember we are only here because he caved on the original shutdown) declare a national emergency on the border which will be immediately tied up in court with any potential funds in endless filed cases challenging his right to do so and/or even divert such funding from both open border political parties for an unknown period but certainly past 2020.
Place this critical national issue in the hands of his fair-weather Republican allies, Chief Justice “as the wind blows” Roberts with a possible deciding vote from missing in action Ginsburg to blow it all out of the water. There is a word for this and it is called eyewash. He shouldn’t sign the bill if he’s going to declare a national emergency. There are things in that bill that never should see the light of day. Expanding catch and release for one.
Forget the lack of border wall funding, among other despicable things this bill gives a path to amnesty for MS-13 members. This one thing alone could destroy his presidency.
Do You Support President Trump Signing This Compromise Bill
Yes
