Share to twitter
Share to linkedin
U.S. House Speaker Nancy Pelosi, a Democrat from California, caps a pen after signing a deal to end a partial government shutdown at the U.S. Capitol in Washington, D.C., U.S., on Friday, Jan. 25, 2019. Photographer: Eric Thayer/Bloomberg
© 2019 Bloomberg Finance LP
What can we do when negotiations grind to a point of impasse? The recent federal government shutdown serves as a new painful case study, where failure to create an agreement cost as many as 4.8 million workers - both federal employees and government contractors - acute financial pain . Though pay resumed for federal agencies on January after the 35-day furlough, the most recent version of the next deal to avoid a shutdown did not include providing back pay to contractors. As this tentative deal heads to the White House in advance of the Friday deadline, I asked three negotiation experts for their advice on what to do when facing a tough negotiation deadlock. How can lessons learned from this negotiation failure inform better decisions in business? These expert suggested approaches gleaned from their experience in local and state government, business and international diplomacy, and point to tested tactics that can dissolve standoff when a negotiating partner might refuse to bargain.
Kathy Webb is the City Director for Ward 3 in Little Rock, Arkansas. Webb is the first openly LGBTQ state legislator and first woman to serve as the vice chair of the joint budget committee in the Arkansas legislature. She is accustomed to working with folks that, as she says, she does not see eye-to-eye with. For Webb, the negative impact of the December and January federal shutdown was very concrete. “About 7,000 Arkansans are employed by the federal government, either directly or as contractors,” Webb said. Shortly after the shutdown began, one of Webb’s friends who works at an area airport reached out to local restaurants for help, and restaurants began offering meals to TSA employees who continued to work without pay. Webb knows this because being a municipal elected official is a part time job, and her full time employment is serving as the executive director of the Arkansas Hunger Relief Alliance.
As Webb and others realized that the shutdown would be prolonged, they began to mobilize assistance in coordination with the city of Little Rock and other hunger relief organizations. Over the course of the shutdown, this coalition was able to provide 30,000 pounds of food to furloughed federal workers and contractor workers.
If Webb had been a Congressional negotiator, her bargaining advice would be to find an unexpected and persuasive perspective. While she hopes that humanitarian appeals would persuade all elected officials, she recognizes that it may not sway every negotiator. “When we considered an extended shut down, we knew that it could affect 7,000 workers as well as 330,000 Arkansans on Supplemental Nutrition Assistance Program (SNAP) benefits. A protracted shutdown where SNAP benefits would stop would create incalculable damage to families,” she said. But instead of using that evidence to convince others to end the shutdown, Webb suggests considering the effects of the shutdown on retail health. “If you looked at it from an economic perspective, what impact would this have on grocery stores and local economies? It would deeply harm businesses across the state.” Webb also pointed out that the shutdown could negatively impact stocks as well as large corporations important to Arkansas, like Walmart and Tyson Foods. “That might not be my number one reason for agreeing to a deal, but what’s your reason? How can we put these reasons together to find a solution?” Webb asks. Her key tactic in brokering an agreement is to be flexible on perspective, allowing that flexibility to inform how you might build a persuasive argument to break through an impasse.
Beth Fisher-Yoshida suggests highlighting a slightly different approach. She is the academic director of negotiation and conflict resolution at Columbia University, and she mentioned that sometimes the best way to manage a difficult negotiating partner is to point out an intolerable outcome of not negotiating. She also stressed that the negative outcome has to be short-term, because a sense of urgency can motivate against delay.
Fisher-Yoshida also suggests including a new issue or task in a negotiation can help move through a breakdown or stall. In fact, taking a break and working on a completely new or different issue from the one that might have caused the impasse in the first place can potentially rebuild trust between parties. “By jointly working on something together, negotiators can build new bonds and lay the foundation for a more collaborative way of engaging. Once this new behavior is the new norm, they might be more ready to re-engage on the sticky issue,” she said. Switching issues or tasks could create that key break in tension that keeps parties from reaching an important solution.
Negotiation deadlock can also be solved by bringing in a new party to bridge the impasse. Erin Pelton has seen this method be successfully deployed in tough negotiations. She is a managing director at the public affairs firm Mercury and previously served as a U.S. diplomat. “In foreign affairs, when parties are stuck at an impasse, a neutral mediator can be deployed to engage in what is known as shuttle diplomacy , with the envoy shuttling between the parties in search of possible solutions. Yet this concept has a lot of utility beyond diplomacy and is an effective way to learn more about the opposing side’s views, maneuvering space, and constraints,” she said. Pelton mentioned that negotiations will often break down when the parties involved are not willing to speak freely in front of each other. Pelton notes that in these tenuous negotiations, private meetings led by a credible third party may be the only viable option to advance all parties towards a solution.
When thinking about the government shutdown, Pelton also pointed out a few characteristics that add strain to the negotiation. There is a lack of certainty that there will be support for compromise from all parties, which creates tremendous strain on those working towards even a short-term agreement. Successful negotiators will often work hard to eliminate uncertainty, which is hard to do when the bottom line in the negotiation is unknown.  “It’s clear there is a lack of trust between the parties – in no small part because of President Trump’s unpredictability – which provides an opening for someone with credibility to seek to bring the parties together to forge a solution, even if in an unofficial capacity,” Pelton said. As the deadline nears, hopefully official and unofficial negotiators will help ensure that a second agreement is successful and keep the federal government working.
 
Follow Tanya Tarr for more stories on how leaders authentically negotiate and win. Sign up for her weekly negotiation newsletter .
Tanya Tarr
Contributor
I help leaders negotiate authentically with emotional intelligence. I am passionate about elevating remarkable stories of collaboration that connect people with their power to do good in the world. I also think that equal pay policies point us to the future of work. Previou...
Read More
