Dear David,

Continue the Johns Hopkins experience that you started through Coursera by earning your engineering master’s degree online, taking a summer session course, and subscribing to daily public health news.

Online Master’s Degree Programs from Johns Hopkins Engineering

Johns Hopkins Engineering for Professionals’ online graduate program is tailored to meet the academic and career needs of working professionals.

Choose from 21 master’s and a host of certificate programs that can take what you’ve learned through Coursera to even greater heights, including:

Data science

Computer science

Cybersecurity

Healthcare Systems Engineering

Information Systems Engineering

What’s more, it takes only 10 courses to earn your degree in any of our online programs. There is no GRE required and no fee to apply. Request more information or call us at 1-800-548-3647 to talk with an admissions counselor about your options.

Enroll in the Summer Institutes at the Bloomberg School

Take a summer session course to advance your academic and career goals in a dynamic learning environment. The short-term courses in 11 institutes offer students and working professionals from public health and other sectors a way to earn credits toward a degree or explore a particular topic of interest.

Choose from 120+ courses—online or at our Baltimore campus—across diverse public health disciplines with the same academic rigor and world-class faculty instruction as regular-term courses but in a condensed, flexible format. From health policy advocacy to environmental health to data analysis and more, there’s a course for you this summer. Summer Institutes run from May 29, 2019 through early August. Learn more and enroll now!

Get the Latest Global Public Health News

Join more than 30,000 subscribers in 170 countries who get the most important US and global public health news in a free, smartly curated, easy-to-scan weekday enewsletter.

Save time: Get the latest news at your fingertips

Be smart: Share important articles with your boss and friends

Connect: Meet the key players in global public health

Global Health NOW http://www.globalhealthnow.org/ is essential weekday reading. It features up-to-the-minute news as well as exclusive commentaries, news articles and Q&As about the most pressing global public health issues.
