You want better audio right?

Whether you're a video creator, podcaster, online course creator, YouTuber, musician or anyone else recording & editing audio, this is the perfect course for you.

Our promise is that by the end of this course you will have better-sounding audio if you put into practice the techniques we teach.

Sounds great, right?!

ENROLL FOR 90% OFF TODAY - $9.99

Why you should enroll this week?

This is the lowest price you'll ever see for this course

You automatically get entered to win a Rode smartLav+ microphone

We have a 30-day moneyback guarantee, so there's no risk

For the price of a pizza, your audience can listen to better audio from you!


What will you learn?

Understand the equipment needed to record great audio on any budget

Know how to use microphones, audio interfaces, and accessories

Decrease background noise and echo with room treatment, including cheap DIY methods that actually work

Record and sync audio from multiple cameras or sources

Edit audio in a free application called Pro Tools First

Mix audio to make it sound professional with effects like Gain, Noise Gate, De-Essing, EQ, Compression, Limiting and more

Export high quality audio for any purpose

Use the techniques learned in Pro Tools First in any other editing application of your choice

What do you get when you enroll?

4+ hours of premium video training

Lifetime access to course updates

Helpful support from instructors who truly care

Downloadable guides

An in-demand skill

START LEARNING TODAY + WIN A MICROPHONE


If you enroll in this course in the first week, you'll automatically be entered into a random drawing for a Rode smartLav+ microphone - our recommended microphone for using with a smartphone. The winner will be announced via a Udemy announcement and contacted via a private Udemy message next week.

Who are your instructors?

Tomas George is a music producer, composer and audio engineer who has become a best-seller on Udemy teaching audio & music production. He's incredible at what he does and loves to share his passion & expertise with you.

Phil Ebiner is a video producer, podcaster and YouTuber who has taught over 1,000,000 students around the world. He's excited to share real-world examples of how he improves his audio using the tips & techniques in this course.

This Complete Audio Production Course is a fast and effective way to improve your audio.


Start by learning all of the equipment you need. You'll learn about several types of microphones, including shotgun, lavalier and studio/podcasting microphones. You'll learn about the accessories we recommend to improve audio like windscreens. You'll learn about audio interfaces and how they work to record better audio. Phil shows you his entire setup for creating high-quality videos for online courses & YouTube so that you can see everything in action.

You'll learn the importance of monitoring audio with headphones, so that you are certain that your audio sounds great.


Next, you'll learn about travel and location recording, including the equipment we use and recommend. You'll learn tips for recording audio with two separate cameras or audio recorders that will be synced in post-production. Then you'll learn how to manually and automatically sync sound while editing.


Then, a major part of this course is audio editing and mixing. This is the part where you can do things like reduce background noise and make someone's voice sound like it's a professional voice recording. With effects like gain, noise gate, de-essing, EQ (equalization), compression, loudness and limiting, and automation, your audio will sound beautiful! And of course you'll learn how to export your audio so it sounds great for anyone watching or listening.

Our Happiness Guarantee

You have a 30-day 100% moneyback guarantee. So there's no risk in enrolling in this course right now. You can try it out, and if it's not for you get a refund. We want to make sure you are happy with your purchase.

If there is anything we can do to make this course better, we are always here to listen and hear your feedback.

Ready to record and mix better audio?

ENROLL FOR JUST $9.99

